The Project Gutenberg eBook of Something about Eve, by James Branch
Cabell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Something about Eve
       A comedy of fig-leaves

Author: James Branch Cabell

Release Date: January 13, 2023 [eBook #69779]

Language: English

Produced by: Delphine Lettau, Cindy Beyer, Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan & the
             online Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
             http://www.pgdpcanada.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOMETHING ABOUT EVE ***





                          SOMETHING ABOUT EVE


                        A Comedy of Fig-leaves

                                  BY
                          JAMES BRANCH CABELL


                     “I WAS AFRAID, BECAUSE I WAS
                       NAKED: AND I HID MYSELF”


                                LONDON
                   JOHN LANE THE BODLEY HEAD LIMITED




                        First Published in 1927
                  Made and Printed in Great Britain by
             Tonbridge Printers Peach Hall Works Tonbridge




                                   To
                             ELLEN GLASGOW

                    —very naturally—this book which
                     commemorates the intelligence
                                of women




                                CONTENTS
                      PART ONE: THE BOOK OF OUTSET

         1 How the Tempter Came                                   3
         2 Evelyn of Lichfield                                    6
         3 Two Geralds                                           15
         4 That Devil in the Library                             21

                     PART TWO: THE BOOK OF TWILIGHT

         5 Christening of the Stallion                           33
         6 Evadne of the Dusk                                    38

                    PART THREE: THE BOOK OF DOONHAM

         7 Evasherah of the First Water-Gap                      51
         8 The Mother of Every Princess                          65
         9 How One Butterfly Fared                               72

                     PART FOUR: THE BOOK OF DERSAM

        10 Wives at Caer Omn                                     77
        11 The Glass People                                      83
        12 Confusions of the Golden Travel                       86
        13 Colophon of a God                                     99
        14 Evarvan of the Mirror                                102

                     PART FIVE: THE BOOK OF LYTREIA

        15 At Tenjo’s Court                                     113
        16 The Holy Nose of Lytreia                             120
        17 Evaine of Peter’s Tomb                               126
        18 End of a Vixen                                       142
        19 Beyond the Veil                                      146

                     PART SIX: THE BOOK OF TUROINE

        20 Thaumaturgists in Labor                              155
        21 They That Wore Blankets                              159
        22 The Paragraph of the Sphinx                          164
        23 Odd Transformation of a Towel                        176

                     PART SEVEN: THE BOOK OF POETS

        24 On Mispec Moor                                       183
        25 The God Conforms                                     190
        26 “Qualis Artifex!”                                    195
        27 Regarding the Stars                                  206

                     PART EIGHT: THE BOOK OF MAGES

        28 Fond Magics of Maya                                  215
        29 Leucosia’s Singing                                   220
        30 What Solomon Wanted                                  225
        31 The Chivalry of Merlin                               229
        32 A Boy That Might As Well Be                          238

                   PART NINE: THE BOOK OF MISPEC MOOR

        33 Limitations of Gaston                                247
        34 Ambiguity of the Brown Man                           255
        35 Of Kalki and a Döoppelganger                         259
        36 Tannhäuser’s Troubled Eyes                           263
        37 Contentment of the Mislaid God                       270

                     PART TEN: THE BOOK OF ENDINGS

        38 About the Past of a Bishop                           281
        39 Baptism of a Musgrave                                294
        40 On the Turn of a Leaf                                298
        41 Child of All Fathers                                 301
        42 Theodorick Rides Forth                               305
        43 Economics of Redemption                              310
        44 Economics of Common-Sense                            319
        45 Farewell to All Fair Welfare                         323

                   PART ELEVEN: THE BOOK OF REMNANTS

        46 The Gray Quiet Way of Ruins                          329
        47 How Horvendile Gave Up the Race                      333

                 PART TWELVE: THE BOOK OF ACQUIESCENCE

        48 Fruits of the Sylan’s Industry                       345
        49 Triumph of the Two Truths                            352
        50 Exodus of Glaum                                      362




                      THE ARGUMENT OF THIS COMEDY
    Set forth as clearly as discretion permits, for the convenience
                        of the intending reader

             THESE shadows here are subtle: for they wait
           Like usurers that briefly lend the sun
           Disfavor and a stinted while to run
           With flaunting vigor through life’s large estate
           Of fire and turmoil; or like thieves that hate
           No law-lord save the posturing of desire
           With genuflexions where dejections tire
           The fig-leaf’s trophy with the fig-leaf’s weight.

             Yes; they are subtle: and where no light is
           These tread not openly, as heretofore,
           With whisperings of that at odds with this
           To veil their passing, where a broken door
           Confronts the zenith, and Semiramis,
           At one with Upsilon, exhorts no more.




                               PART ONE

                          THE BOOK OF OUTSET

                  “Wheresoever a Man Lives, There
                  Will be a Thornbush Near His Door.”




                                   1.
                          How the Tempter Came


FOR some moments after he had materialized, and had become perceivable
by human senses, the Sylan waited. He waited, looking down at the very
busy, young, red-haired fellow who sat within arm’s reach at the
writing-table. This boy, as yet, was so unhappily engrossed in literary
composition as not to have noticed his ghostly visitant. So the Sylan
waited....

And as always, to an onlooker, the motions of creative writing revealed
that flavor of the grotesque which is attendant upon every form of
procreation. The Sylan rather uneasily noted the boy’s writhing antics,
which to a phantom seemed strange and eerie.... For this mortal world,
as the Sylan well remembered, was remarkably opulent in things which
gave pleasure when they were tasted or handled,—the world in which this
pensive boy was handling, and now nibbled at, the tip-end of a black
pen. Outside this somewhat stuffy room were stars or sunsets or
impressive mountains, to be looked at from almost anywhere in this
mortal world,—which would also afford to the investigative, who
searched in appropriate places, such agreeable smells as that of vervain
and patchouli, and of smouldering incense, and of hayfields under a
large moon, and of pine woods, and the robustious salty odors of a wind
coming up from the sea.

Likewise, at this very moment, you might encounter, in the prodigal
world outside this somewhat stuffy room, those tinier, those mere baby
winds which were continually whispering in the tree-tops about this
world’s marvelousness now that April was departing; or you might hear
the irrationally dear sound of a bird calling dubiously in the spring
night, with a very piercing sweetness; or, if you went adventuring yet
farther, you might hear the muffled delicious voice of a woman
counterfeiting embarrassment and reproof of your enterprise.... Outside
this book-filled room, in fine, was that unforgotten mortal world in
which any conceivable young man could live very royally, and with
never-failing ardor, upon every person’s patrimony of the five human
senses.

And yet, in such a well-stocked world, this lean, red-headed boy was
vexedly making upon paper (with that much nibbled-at black pen) small
scratches, the most of which he almost immediately canceled with yet
other scratches, all the while with the air of a person who is about
something intelligent and of actual importance. This Gerald Musgrave
therefore seemed to the waiting, spectral Sylan a somewhat excessively
silly mortal, thus to be squandering a lad’s brief while of living in
vigorous young human flesh, among so many readily accessible objects
which a boy like this could always be seeing and tasting and smelling
and hearing and handling, with unforgotten delight.

But the Sylan reflected, too, a bit wistfully, that his own mortal youth
was now for some time overpast. It had, in fact, been nearly six hundred
years since he had been really young, a good five and a half centuries
since young Guivric and his nine tall comrades in the famous fellowship
had so delighted in their patrimony of five human senses and had spent
that inheritance rather notably. Yes, he was getting on, the Sylan
reflected; he had quite lost touch with the ways of these latter-day
young people.

Yet it was perhaps unavoidable that in the great while since he had gone
about this world in a man’s natural body, the foibles of human youth had
become somewhat strange to him; and it was not, after all, to appraise
the wastefulness of authors that you had traveled a long way, from Caer
Omn to Lichfield, at the command of another Author, to put this doomed
red-headed boy out of living.

The Sylan spoke....




                                   2.
                          Evelyn of Lichfield


THE Sylan spoke. He spoke at some length. And the young man at the
writing-table, after arising with the slight start which these
supernatural visitations invariably evoked from him, had presently heard
the Sylan’s proposal.

“Who is it,” said Gerald, then, “that tempts me to this sacrifice and to
this partial destruction?”

The Sylan replied, “The name that I had in my mortal living was Guivric,
but now I am called Glaum of the Haunting Eyes.”

That was a queer name, and it was a queer arrangement, too, which this
vague wraith in the likeness of a man was proposing,—an arrangement,
Gerald Musgrave decided, which, at least, was worth consideration....

For, as a student of magic, Gerald Musgrave in his time had dealt with
many demons: but never had been made to him, before this final night in
the April of 1805, such a queer, and yet rational, and even handsome
offer as was now held out. Gerald pushed aside the manuscript of his
unfinished romance about Dom Manuel of Poictesme; he straightened the
ruffles about his throat; and for an instant he weighed the really quite
alluring suggestion.... Most demons were obsessed by the notion of
buying from you a soul which Gerald, in this age of reason, had no sure
proof that he possessed. But this Glaum of the Haunting Eyes, it seemed,
was empowered and willing to rid Gerald of all corporal obligations, and
to take over Gerald’s physical life just as it stood,—even with all the
plaguing complications of Gerald’s entanglement with Evelyn Townsend.

“I was once human,” the Sylan explained, “and wore a natural body. And
old habits, in such trifles as apparel, cling. I feel at times, even
nowadays, after five centuries of a Sylan’s care-free living, rather at
a loss for human ties.”

“I find them,” Gerald stated, “vast nuisances. Candor is no more
palatable than an oyster when either is out of season. And my relatives
are all cursed with a very disastrous candor. They conceal from me
nothing save that respect and envy with which they might, appropriately,
regard my accomplishments and nobler qualities.”

“That has been the way with all relatives, Gerald, since Cain and Abel
were brothers.”

“Still, but for one calamity, I could, it might be, endure my brothers.
I could put up with my sisters’ voluble and despondent view of my
future. I might even go so far in supererogation as to condone—upon
alternate Thursdays, say,—a chorus of affectionate aunts who speak for
my own good.”

“The first person, Gerald, that pretended to speak for the real good of
anybody else was a serpent in a Garden, and ever since then that sort of
talking has been venomous.”

“Yet all these afflictions I might,” said Gerald,—“conceivably, at
least, I might be able to endure, if only the pursuit of my art had not
been hampered, and the ease of my body blasted, by the greatest blessing
which can befall any man.”

“You allude, I imagine,” said the Sylan, “to the love of a good woman?”

“That is it, that is precisely the unmerited and too irremovable
blessing which may end, after all, in reducing me to your suggested
vulgar fraction of a suicide.”

Now Gerald was silent. He leaned far back in his chair. He meditatively
placed together the tips of his two little fingers, and then one by one
the tips of his other fingers, until his thumbs also were in contact;
and he regarded the result, upon the whole, with disapprobation.

“Every marriage gets at least one man into trouble,” he philosophised,
“and it is not always the bridegroom. You see, sir, by the worst of
luck, this Evelyn Townsend was already married, so that ours had
necessarily to become an adulterous union. It is the tragedy of my life
that I met my Cousin Evelyn too late to marry her. Any married person of
real ingenuity and tolerable patience can induce his wife to divorce
him. But there is no way known to me for a Southern gentleman to get rid
of a lady whom he has possessed illegally, until she has displayed the
decency to become tired of him. And Evelyn, sir, in this matter of
continuing her immoral relations with me has behaved badly, very badly
indeed—”

“All women—” Glaum began.

“No, but let us not be epigrammatic and aphoristic and generally
flippant about a perverseness which is pestering me beyond any
reasonable endurance! You know as well as I do that every pretty woman
ought, by and by, to remember what she owes to her husband and to her
marriage vows, and to act accordingly. Repentance when suitably timed in
a liaison makes for everybody’s happiness. But some women, sir, some
women stay more affectionately adhesive than an anaconda. They weep.
They reply to their helpless paramours’ every least attempt at any
rational statement, ‘And I trusted you! I gave you all!’”

Glaum nodded, not unsympathetically. “I also in my time have heard that
observation without any active enjoyment. It is, I believe,
unanswerable.”

Gerald shuddered. “There is, for a Southern gentleman at all events, no
really satisfactory reply save murder. And against that solution there
is of course a rather general prejudice. Therefore a woman of this
bleating sort exacts fidelity, she makes every nature of unconscionable
demand, and she pesters you to the verge of lunacy, always upon the
unanswerable ground that her claim upon your gratitude, and upon your
instant obedience in everything, ought not to exist. Oh, I assure you,
my dear fellow, there is no more sensible piece of friendly counsel
existent than is the Seventh Commandment!”

“Your aphorisms are more or less true, and your predicament I can
understand. Nevertheless—”

But the Sylan hesitated.

“You also understand us Musgraves perfectly!” Gerald applauded. “For I
perceive you are now about to wheedle me forward in this business by
throwing obstacles in my way.”

“I was but going to point out the truism that, nevertheless, it may be
wiser to put up with your Eve unresistingly—”

“The name,” emended Gerald, “is Evelyn.”

At that the Sylan smiled. “Yes, to be sure! Women do vary in their given
names. It might be wiser, then, I was about to say, for you to put up
with your Evelyn unresistingly, rather than for a student of magic, with
so little real practical experience as yours, to go blundering about the
doubtful road which leads to Antan.”

“But, sir, I have the soul of an artist! Once”—and Gerald pointed to
his manuscript,—“once it was the little art of letters. Then, through
my acquaintance with Gaston Bulmer, who is no doubt known to you—”

The Sylan shook his spectral head, like smoke in a veering wind. “I have
not, I believe, that pleasure.”

“You astound me. I would have supposed the name of Gaston Bulmer to be
in all infernal circles a household word, because the dear old rascal is
an adept, sir, of wide parts, of taste, and of sound judgment. Then,
too, since Mrs. Townsend is his daughter, he has now for some while been
my father-in-law for all practical purposes—But, where was I? Ah, yes!
Through Gaston Bulmer, I repeat, I became initiate into the greatest of
all arts. Now I desire to excel in that art. I note that I falter in the
little art of letters, that my prose is no longer superb and
breath-taking in its loveliness, because my heart is not any longer
really interested in writing, on account of my heart’s ever-pricking
desire to revive in its full former glories the far nobler and—at all
events, in the United States of America,—the unjustly neglected art of
the magician. And from whom else—just as you have suggested, my dear
fellow,—from whom else save the Master Philologist can I get the great
and best words of magic? Do you but answer me that very simple
question!”

“From no one else, to be sure—”

“So, now, you see for yourself!”

“Yet the Master Philologist is nowadays a married man, and is ruled in
everything by his wife. And this Queen Freydis has a mirror which must,
they say, be faced by those persons who venture into the goal of all the
gods of men—”

“That mirror, too,” said Gerald, airily, “I may be needing. Mirrors are
employed in many branches of magic.”

Glaum now was speaking with rather more of graveness than there seemed
any call for. And Glaum said:

“For one, I would not meddle with that mirror. Even in the land of
Dersam, where a mirror is sacred, we do not desire any dealings with the
Mirror of the Hidden Children and with those strange reflections which
are unclouded by either good or evil.”

“I shall face the Mirror of the Hidden Children,” Gerald said, with his
chin well up, “and should I see any particular need for it, I shall
fetch that mirror also out of Antan. When a citizen of the United States
of America takes up the pursuit of an art, sir, he does not
shilly-shally about it.”

“For my part,” the Sylan answered, “I wearied, some centuries ago, of
all magic: and I hanker, rather, after the more material things of life.
For five hundred years and over, in my untroubled abode at Caer Omn, in
the land of Dersam, I have reigned among the dreams of a god—”

“But how did you come by these dreams?”

“They forsook him, Gerald, when his hour was come to descend into
Antan.”

“That saying, sir, I cannot understand.”

“It is not necessary, Gerald, that you should. Meanwhile, I admit, the
life of a Sylan has no fret in it, a Sylan has nothing to be afraid of:
and there is in me a mortal taint which cannot endure interminable
contentment any longer. You conceive, I also was once a mortal man, with
my deceivings and my fears and my doubts to spice my troubled deference
to the ever-present folly of my fellows and to the ever-present
ruthlessness of time and chance. And, as I remember it, Gerald, that
Guivric, whom people so preposterously called the Sage, got more zest
out of his subterfuges and compromises than I derive from being
care-free and rather bored twenty-four hours to each insufferable day.
Therefore, I repeat, I will take over your natural body—”

“But that, my dear fellow, would leave me without any carnal residence.”

“Why, Gerald, but I am surprised at such scepticism in you who pay your
pew-rent so regularly! We have it upon old, fine authority that for
every man there is a natural body and a spiritual body.”

Then Gerald colored up. He felt that both his erudition and his piety
stood reproved. And he said, contritely:

“In fact, as a member of the Protestant Episcopal church, I am familiar
with the Burial Service—Yes, you are right. I have no desire to take
issue with St. Paul. The religion of my fathers assures me that I have
two bodies. I can live in only one of them at a time. It is, for that
matter, a bit ostentatious, it has a vaguely disreputable sound, for any
unmarried man to be maintaining two establishments. So, let us get on!”

“Therefore, I repeat, I will take over your natural body, just as that
first Glaum once took over my body; and I will take over all your body’s
imbroglios, even with your mistress,—who can hardly be more tasking to
get along with than are the seven official wives and the three hundred
and fifty-odd concubines I am getting rid of.”

“You,” Gerald said, morosely, “do not know Evelyn Townsend.”

“I trust,” the Sylan stated, more gallantly, “to have that privilege
to-morrow.”

It was in this way the bargain was struck. And then the Sylan who was
called Glaum of the Haunting Eyes did what was requisite.




                                   3.
                              Two Geralds


THE Sylan who was called Glaum of the Haunting Eyes, be it repeated,
did that which was requisite.... To Gerald, as a student of magic, the
most of the process was familiar enough: and if some curious grace-notes
were, perhaps, excursions into the less wholesome art of goety, that was
not Gerald’s affair. It was sufficient that, when the Sylan had ended,
no Sylan was any longer visible. Instead, in Gerald Musgrave’s library,
stood face to face two Geralds, each in a blue coat and a golden yellow
waistcoat, each with a tall white stock and ruffles about his throat,
and each clad in every least respect precisely like the other.

Nor did these two lean, red-headed Geralds differ in countenance. Each
smiled at the other with the same amply curved, rather womanish mouth
set above the same prominent, long chin; and each found just the same
lazy and mildly humorous mockery in the large and very dark blue, the
really purple, eyes of the other: for between these two Gerald Musgraves
there was no visual difference whatever.

One half of this quaint pair now sat down at the writing-table; and,
fiddling with the papers there, he took up the pages of Gerald
Musgrave’s unfinished romance, about the high loves of his famous
ancestor Dom Manuel of Poictesme and Madame Niafer, the Soldan of
Barbary’s daughter. Gerald had begun this tale in the days when he had
intended to endow America with a literature superior to that of other
countries; but for months now he had neglected it: and, in fact, ever
since he set up as a student of magic he had lacked time, somehow, with
every available moment given over to runes and cantraps and
suffumigations, to get back to any really serious work upon this
romance.

Then the seated Gerald, smiling almost sadly, looked up toward his twin.

“Thus it was,” said the seated Gerald, “a great while ago at Asch, when
two Guivrics confronted each other and played shrewdly for the control
of the natural body of Guivric of Perdigon. All which I lost on that
day, through my over-human clinging to the Two Truths, I now have back,
after five centuries of pleasure-seeking in the land of Dersam. And I
find this second natural body of mine committed to the creating of yet
more pleasure-giving nonsense, about, of all persons, that eternal
Manuel of Poictesme! I find this body also enamored of the fig-leaf of
romance!”

“It may be that I do not understand your simile,” said the standing
Gerald, “for in the United States of America the fig-leaf is, rather,
the nice symbol of decency, it is, indeed, the beginning and the end of
democratic morality.”

“Nevertheless, and granting all this,” replied the now demon-haunted
natural body of Gerald Musgrave, “the fig-leaf is a romance with which
human optimism veils the only two eternal and changeless and rather
unlovely realities of which any science can be certain.”

“Ah, now I comprehend! And without utterly agreeing with you, I cannot
deny there is something in your metaphor. Yet I must tell you, sir, that
I am perhaps peculiarly qualified to deal with Dom Manuel because of the
fact that this famous hero was my lineal ancestor—”

“Oh, but, my poor Gerald, was he indeed!”

“Yes, through both the Musgrave and the Allonby lines. For my mother’s
father was Gerald Allonby—”

And Gerald would have gone on to explain the precise connection, of
which the Musgrave family was justifiably proud. But the unappreciative
Sylan who now wore good Musgrave flesh and blood had remarked, of all
conceivable remarks:

“I honestly condole with you. Yet ancestors cannot be picked like
strawberries. And my luck was even worse, for I was of Manuel’s
fellowship. I knew the tall swaggerer himself throughout his blundering
career. And I can assure you that, apart from his unhuman gift for
keeping his mouth shut, there was nothing a bit wonderful about the
cock-eyed, gray impostor.”

This was surprising news. Still, Gerald reflected, a demon did, in the
way of business, meet many persons in circumstances in which the better
side of their natures was not to the fore. Gerald therefore flew to
defend the honor of his race quite civilly.

“My progenitor, in any event, carried through his imposture. He died
very well thought of by his neighbors. That you will find to be a
leading consideration with any citizen of the United States of America.
And I in turn assure you that my account of the great Manuel’s exploits
will be, when it is completed, an exceedingly fine romance. It will be a
tale which has not its like in America. Loveliness lies swooning upon
every page, illuminated by a never-ceasing coruscation of wit. It is a
story which, as you might put it, grips the reader. There is no
imaginable reader but will be instantly engaged, by my adroit depiction
of the hardihood and the heroic virtues of Dom Manuel—”

“But,” said the really very handsomely disguised Sylan, “Manuel had
always a cold in his head. Nobody can honestly admire an elderly fellow
who is continually sneezing and spitting—”

“In American literature of a respectable cast no human being has any
excretory functions. Should you reflect upon this statement, you will
find it to be the one true test of delicacy. At most, some tears or a
bead or two of perspiration may emanate, but not anything more, upon
this side of pornography. That rule applies with especial force to love
stories, for reasons we need hardly go into. And my romance is, of
course, the story of Dom Manuel’s love for the beautiful Niafer, the
Soldan of Barbary’s daughter—”

“Her father was a stable groom. She had a game leg. She was not
beautiful. She was dish-faced, she was out and out ugly, apart from her
itch to be reforming everybody and pestering them with respectability—”

“Faith, charity and hope are the three cardinal virtues,” said Gerald,
reprovingly. “And I think that a gentleman should exercise these three,
in just this order, when he is handling the paternity or the looks or
the legs of any lady.”

“—And she smelt bad. Every month she seemed to me to smell worse. I do
not know why, but I think the Countess simply hated to wash.”

“My dear fellow! really now, I can but refer you to my previously cited
rule as to the anatomy of romance. A heroine who smells bad every
month—No, upon my word, I can find nothing engaging in that notion. I
had far rather play with some wholly other and more beautiful idea than
with a notion so utterly lacking in seductiveness. For this, I repeat,
is a romance. It is a romance such as has not its like in America. I
therefore consider that I display considerable generosity in presenting
you with those quite perfect ninety-three pages, and in permitting you
to complete this romance and to take the credit for writing all of it.
Why, your picture will be in the newspapers, and learned professors will
annotate your fornications, and oncoming ages will become familiar with
every mean act you ever committed!”

To that the Sylan replied: “I shall complete your balderdash, no doubt,
since all your functions are now my functions. I shall complete it, if
only my common-sense and my five centuries of living among the loveliest
dreams of a god, and, above all, if my first-hand information as to
these people, have not ruined me for the task of ascribing large virtues
to human beings.”

“I envy you that task,” said Gerald, with real wistfulness, “but, very
much as there was a geas upon my famous ancestor to make a figure in
this world, just so there is a compulsion upon me. The compulsion is
upon me to excel in my art; and to do this I must liberate the great and
best words of the Master Philologist.”

Then the true Gerald went out of the room through a secret passage
unknown to him until this evening.




                                   4.
                       That Devil in the Library


YET Gerald looked back for an instant at that unfortunate devil, in
the appearance of a sedate young red-haired man, who remained in the
library. To regard this Gerald Musgrave, now, was like looking at a
droll acquaintance in whom Gerald was not, after all, very deeply
interested.

For this Gerald Musgrave, the one who remained in the library, was
really droll in well-nigh every respect. About the Gerald who was
now—it might be, a bit nobly,—yielding up his life in preference to
violating the code of a gentleman, and who was now quitting Lichfield,
in order to become a competent magician, there was not anything
ludicrous. That Gerald was an honorable and intelligent person who
sought a high and rational goal.

But that part of Gerald Musgrave which remained behind, that part which
was already marshaling more words in order the more pompously to inter
the exploits of Dom Manuel of Poictesme, appeared droll. There was, for
one thing, no sensible compulsion upon that red-haired young fellow thus
to be defiling clean paper with oak-gall, when he might at that very
instant be comfortably drunk at the Vartreys’ dinner, or he might be
getting pleasurable excitement out of the turns of fortune at Dorn’s
gaming-parlors, or he might be diverting himself in his choice of four
bedrooms with a lively companion.

But, instead, he sat alone with bookshelves rising stuffily to every
side of him,—rather low bookshelves upon the tops of which were perched
a cherished horde of porcelain and brass figures representing one or
another beast or fowl or reptile. Among the shiny toys, which in
themselves attested his childishness, the young fellow sat of his own
accord thus lonely. And his antics, incontestably, were queer. He
fidgeted. He shifted his rump. He hunched downward, as if with a sudden
access of rage, over the paper before him. He put back his head, to
stare intently at a white china hen. He pulled at the lobe of his left
ear; and he then rather frantically scratched the interior of this ear
with his little finger.

Between these bodily exercises he, who was so precariously seated upon
the crust of a planet teetering unpredictably through space, was making
upon the paper before him, with his much nibbled-at black pen, small
scratches, the most of which he presently canceled with yet other
scratches, all the while with the air of a person who was about
something intelligent and of actual importance. The spectacle was queer;
it was unspeakably irrational: for, as always, to an onlooker, the
motions of creative writing revealed that flavor of the grotesque which
is attendant upon every form of procreation.

Yet it was upon a graver count that Gerald felt honestly sorry for the
inheritor of Gerald Musgrave’s natural body. For Gerald was giving up
his life out of deference to the code of a gentleman with rather more of
relief than he had permitted the Sylan to suspect. And the poor devil
who had so rashly taken over this life would—howsoever acute his
diabolical intelligence,—he too would, in the end, Gerald reflected, be
powerless against that unreasonable Evelyn Townsend and that even more
unreasonable code of a gentleman.

Nobody, Gerald’s thoughts ran on, now that he had found a rather
beautiful idea to play with, nobody who had not actually indulged in the
really dangerous dalliance of adultery in Lichfield could quite
understand the hopelessness of the unfortunate fiend’s position. For in
the chivalrous Lichfield of 1805 adultery had its inescapable etiquette.
Your exact relations with the woman were in the small town a matter of
public knowledge familiar to everybody: but no person in Lichfield would
ever formally grant that any such relations existed. Eyes might meet
with perfect understanding: but from the well-bred lips of no Southern
gentleman or gentlewoman would ever come more than a suave and placid
“Evelyn and Gerald have always been such good friends.” For you were
second cousins, to begin with: and—in a Lichfield wherein, as
everywhere else in this human world, most people unaffectedly disliked,
and belittled, and kept away from their cousins,—that relationship was
considered a natural reason for you two being much together. Moreover,
every woman in Lichfield was, by another really rather staggering social
convention, assumed to be beautiful and accomplished and chaste: it was
an assumption which needed hardly to be stated: it was merely among all
Southern gentry an axiom in the vast code of being well-bred.

It followed that, when you were once involved in a liaison, your one
salvation was for your co-partner in iniquity to become tired of you,
and to cease dwelling upon the fact that she had trusted you and had
given you all. That remained, of course, by the dictates of Southern
chivalry, at any moment her privilege: but in this case the
inconsiderate woman only grew fonder and fonder of Gerald, and repeated
the dreadful observation more and more frequently.... And it remained,
too, the privilege of the technically aggrieved husband to pick a
quarrel with you, provided only that the grounds of this quarrel in no
way involved a mention of his wife’s name. Then, still by the set rules
of Lichfield’s etiquette, there would be a duel. After the duel you
either were dispiritingly dead or, else, if you happened to be the more
assuredly luckless survivor, you were compelled, merely by the silent
force of everybody’s assumption that a gentleman could not do otherwise,
to marry the widow. To do this was your debt to society at large, in
atonement for having “compromised” a lady, where, bewilderingly enough,
she was unanimously granted never to have been concerned at all. For
never, in either outcome, would the occurrence of anything “wrong” be
conceded, nor would ever the possibility of a lady’s having committed
adultery be so much as hinted at in any speech or act of the chivalrous
gentry of Lichfield.

Meanwhile you were trapped. There was no way whatever of avoiding that
bleated “Oh, and I trusted you! I gave you all!” You were not even
privileged to avoid the woman. It was not considered humanly possible
that you were bored, and upon some occasions frenziedly annoyed, by the
society of a beautiful and accomplished and chaste gentlewoman who
honored you with her friendship. There was, instead, compressing you
everywhere, the tacit but vast force of the general assumption that your
indebtedness to her could not ever be discharged in full. The
deplorable—and sometimes, too, the rather dear—fond woman’s inability
to keep her hands off you was conscientiously not noticed. So your
Cousin Evelyn pawed at you in public without an eyebrow’s going up:
hostesses smilingly put you together: other men affably quitted her side
whensoever you appeared. Her husband was no different: Frank Townsend,
also, genially accepted—in the teeth of whatsoever rationality the man
might privately harbor,—the axiom that “Evelyn and Gerald have always
been such good friends.”

Of course, Gerald granted, this was, in the upper circles of the best
Southern families, an exceptional case. Time and again Gerald had envied
the dozens of other young fellows in Lichfield who were conducting their
liaisons with visibly such superior luck. For the lady tired of them or,
else, was smitten with convenient repentance: and these gay blades
passed on high-heartedly to the embraces of yet other technically
beautiful and accomplished and chaste playfellows. But Evelyn evinced an
impenitence which threatened to be permanent; Evelyn did not tire of
Gerald; she pawed at him; she slipped notes into his hand; she bleated
almost every day her insufferable claim to upset his convenience and his
comfort: and he cursed in all earnestness that fatal charm of his which
held him in such desperate loneliness.

—In loneliness, because not even the lean comfort of candor, not even
any quest of sympathy, was permitted you. A gentleman did not kiss and
tell: he, above all, might not tell that the kissing had become an
infernal nuisance. Not any of your brothers, neither one of your
sisters—not even when your indolence and your general worthlessness had
reduced Cynthia to whimpering bits of the New Testament, or had launched
Agatha in a chattering millrace of babbling maledictory
vaticinations,—would ever recognize to you in plain words that you and
Cousin Evelyn were illicitly intimate. Nor would any of your kindred,
either, ever contemplate the possibility of you yourself acting or
speaking here with common-sense, or in any other manner violating the
formulas set for every gentleman’s conduct by the insane and magnificent
code of Lichfield.

For it was, after all, magnificent, in its own way, the code by which
those bull-headed Musgraves—who shared the blood that was in your body,
but no one of the notions in your astonishingly clever head,—along with
the rest of this brave and stupid Lichfield, lived day after day, and
carried genial, never-troubled self-respect into the graveyard. This
code avoided, so far as Gerald could see, no especial misdoing or crime:
but it did show you how, with the appropriate and most graceful of
gestures, to commit either, when the need arose, in the prescribed
fashion of a well-bred Southern gentleman. Yes, really, Gerald
reflected, that code was rather a beautiful idea to play with. It was an
excellent thing to be a gentleman: but it proved always fatal, too, in
the end, simply because no lady was a gentleman.

However, it was that poor devil in the library who was now involved in
the dangerous task of carrying through an adultery in Lichfield after
the fashion of well-bred persons. It was in his ears that a still rather
dear but too damnably adhesive Evelyn would be bleating every day a
reiteration of the fact that she had trusted him and had given him all.
And Gerald himself, having decorously laid down his life rather than
violate this dreadful code of a gentleman, was now fairly in train to
become a competent magician.

Not ever again would he sit writing among those bookshelves, engrossed,
and rubbing at his chin or forehead, or scratching his head, or sticking
his little finger into his ear, or restively shifting his weight from
one buttock to the other buttock, in his multiform efforts to quicken,
somehow, the flow of lagging thought. He would pause no more to prop his
chin (with an unpleasantly moist hand, as a rule), and thus to stare
lack-wittedly at one or another of the china and brass toys which he
had, quite as idiotically, collected to make vivid his bookshelves. All
these queer exercises, as Gerald, standing there, had seen them in the
last few minutes performed by the natural body of Gerald Musgrave, did,
manifestly, not constitute an engaging or a sane way of spending the
evening, in a somewhat stuffy room.

No, he was now, forever, very happily done with all these forlorn
gymnastics. It was only the natural body of Gerald Musgrave which
henceforward would, before this commensurately irrational audience of
small elephants and dogs and parrots and chicken, go through these
foolish writhing antics, in that wholly nice looking young idiot’s
endeavor to complete the romance about Dom Manuel of Poictesme.... Well,
one could but wish the poor devil joy of his bargain! and it no longer
really mattered that all which pertained to Gerald Musgrave was rather
droll, Gerald decided, as he passed out of sight of that red head bent
over that incessant pen scratching.




                               PART TWO
                         THE BOOK OF TWILIGHT

                       “It is Not Well to Look a
                       Gift Horse in the Mouth.”




                                   5.
                      Christening of the Stallion


GERALD descended nineteen steps; and in the dusk he found waiting
there, beside a tethered riding-horse, yet another young man, with hair
as red as Gerald Musgrave’s own.

“That you may travel the more quickly, along a woman-haunted way, in
your journeying toward your appointed goal,” this stranger began, “I
have fetched a horse for you to ride upon.”

Yet the speaker was not wholly a stranger. So Gerald now said, “Oh, so
it is you!” As a student of magic, Gerald had held earlier dealings with
this red-haired Horvendile, who was Lord of the Marches of Antan.

And Gerald went on, gratefully: “Come now, but this is kind! Even as a
courtesy between fellow artists, this is generous!”

“The amenities of fellow artists,” returned Horvendile, “are by ordinary
two-edged. And this one may cut deeper than you foreknow.”

“Meanwhile you have brought me this huge shining horse, which cannot be
other than Pegasus—”

“Whether or not this divine steed be that Pegasus which bears romantics
even to the ultimate goal of their dreams, depends upon the horseman. It
has been prophesied, however, that the Redeemer of Antan and the monarch
who shall reign, after the overthrow of the Master Philologist, in the
place beyond good and evil, will come riding upon the silver stallion
that is called, not Pegasus, but Kalki—”

“Oh! oh!” said Gerald: and for an instant he considered this surprising
turn of affairs. To reign in Antan had, very certainly, been no part of
his modest plans; but he saw at once how much more becoming it would be,
and how much better suited to his real merits, to enter into Antan as
its heir apparent, resistless upon the silver stallion famous in old
prophecies, rather than to come as a suppliant begging for a few words.

“Prophecies,” said Gerald, then, “ought to be respected by all well
brought up persons. Only, does this horse happened to be Kalki? Because,
you see, Horvendile, that appears to be the whole point of the
prophecy.”

Rather oddly, Horvendile said, “Whether or not this divine steed be that
Kalki which bears romantics even to the ultimate goal of all the gods,
depends upon the horseman.”

Gerald considered this saying. Gerald smiled, and Gerald remarked:

“Oh, but now I comprehend you! The rider and the owner of any horse is,
quite naturally, entitled to call the animal whatsoever he prefers. Very
well, then! I shall christen this riding-horse Kalki. Yes, Horvendile,
upon mature deliberation, I will accept the throne of Antan, without
considering my personal preferences and my dislike of publicity and
ostentation, in order that the prophecy may be fulfilled, because that
is always a good thing for prophecies.”

“Since that is your decision, Gerald, you have but, after you have paid
homage here, to mount intrepidly. And the divine steed will carry you
upon no common road, but, since he is divine, along that way which the
gods and the great myths pursue in their journeying toward Antan.”

“It is appropriate, of course, that I should travel on the road
patronized by the best classes. Nevertheless, it would, I think, be a
rather beautiful idea—”

“Nevertheless, also,” said Horvendile, “and all the while that you waste
in talking about beautiful ideas, there is a man’s homage to be paid
here; and moreover, at the first gap of the Doonham, the Princess awaits
you with some impatience. It would not be going too far to say, indeed,
that she hungers for your coming.”

“Come now, but the things you tell me steadily become more palatable!”
remarked Gerald, as he approached the huge stallion. “Now that I have
accepted the responsibilities of a throne and of all the great and best
words of the Master Philologist, it would be most unbecoming for a
princess to be ignored by anyone who already is virtually a reigning
monarch. There are amenities to be preserved between royal houses. Very
terrible wars have sprung from the omission of such amenities. So do you
lead me forthwith to this impatient princess; but do you first tell me
the adorable name of her highness!”

Horvendile answered, “The princess who just now awaits you is Evasherah,
the Lady of the First Water-Gap of Doonham.”

“I admit that the information, now I have it, means very little.
Nevertheless, my dear fellow, do you direct me to the water-gap of this
princess!”

“Yet, I repeat, it would be wise for you, before departing from this
place, to render a man’s homage to the ruler of it.”

“Well, Horvendile, the name of this tropical, damp, and this rather
curious smelling country is no doubt better known to you than, I
confess, it stays to me!”

“This place has not any name in the reputable speech of men. It is the
realm of Koleos Koleros.”

At that name Gerald bowed his head; and, as became a student of magic,
he courteously made the appropriate sign.

And Gerald said: “Very dreadful is the name of Koleos Koleros! Yet,
quite apart from the fact that I am a member of the Protestant Episcopal
church, I owe this Koleos Koleros no homage. And I, very certainly,
shall not linger to pay any, with a princess waiting for me! Rather, do
I elect to pass hastily through this land of quags and underbrush, and
to leave this somewhat unsanitarily odored neighborhood, in which, I
perceive, misguided persons yet live—”

For these two young men were no longer alone in this ambiguous valley.
Through the twilight Gerald now saw many women passing furtively toward
a dark laurel grove; and from out of that grove came a queer music.

Then Horvendile spoke of these women.




                                   6.
                           Evadne of the Dusk


NOW all the while that Horvendile talked it was to the accompaniment
of that remote queer music: and Gerald was troubled. He came, at least,
as near to being troubled as Gerald ever permitted himself to do. For
Gerald did not really enjoy trouble of any kind, and said frankly that
he found it uncongenial.

“But these,” said Gerald, by and by, “all these, my dear fellow, I had
thought to have perished a long while ago.”

“You travel, Gerald, on the road of the greater myths. Such myths do not
perish speedily. And, besides, nothing is true anywhere in the Marches
of Antan. All is a seeming and an echo: and through this superficies men
come to know the untruth which makes them free. It follows, in my logic,
that to-day these women are the flute-players of Koleos Koleros. They
serve to-day, forever unsatiated, that most insatiable divinity who is
shaggy and evil-odored, and who can taste no pleasure until after
bloodshed—”

“I have read, also,” Gerald broke in, with the slight smile of one who
is not unpleased to display his learning, “that this Koleos Koleros is a
somewhat contradictory goddess, producing the less the more constantly
that she is cultivated and stirred up—”

“Oho, but a most potent goddess is this Koleos Koleros!” continued
Horvendile. “She is wrinkled and flabby in appearance, yet the most
stout of heroes falls at last before her. Infants perish nightly in her
gloomy vaults, and plagues and diseases harbor there—”

But again Gerald had interrupted him, saying: “Yet I have read,
moreover, that this modest and retired Koleos Koleros, alone of eternal
beings, is ever ardent to quench the ardor of her servitors; and
that—still to praise merit where merit appears,—in her untiring
warfare with all men that rise up to oppose her, she displays the
magnanimity to favor, and to embrace lovingly, the adversary that
attacks her most often and most deeply.”

Horvendile thereupon held out his hand. He showed thus the tip of his
forefinger touching the tip of his thumb so that they formed a circle.
And Horvendile said:

“She varies even as the moon varies. Yet equally is this divine small
monster the bestower of life and of all joy; she charms in defiance of
reason: and whensoever Koleos Koleros appears, red and inflamed and
hideous among her tousled tresses, a man is moved willy-nilly to place
in her his chief delight.”

“Oho!” said Gerald, and, as became a student of magic, he also made the
needful sign, “oho, but a most potent goddess is this Koleos Koleros!”

“Now, then,” continued Horvendile, “all they who in this place serve
eternally this most whimsical divinity are a loving and a peculiarly
happy people. Their amorousness, which here is not ever blighted by
shrill reprobation, has need at no time to fear either the chastisement
of human law nor the anathemas of any other religion anywhere in the
quiet brakes and lowlands of the moist realm of Koleos Koleros. For, you
conceive, these feminine myths who now are flute-players in and about
the shrine of the wrinkled goddess, and who through so many centuries
have been trained in all the arts of pleasure, came by and by into a
certain confusion—”

“But what sort of confusion, Horvendile, do you mean? For I find your
speaking another sort. And I am rather more interested in that
princess—”

“I mean that their religion, which ranks pleasure above all else,
permits no man to pass by unpleased.”

“Ah, now I understand you!”

“—I mean that, through the duties of their religious faith, their way
of living has been given over to an assiduous and an empirical study of
all the charms peculiar to a woman, the more particularly as these
charms are employed—”

“Let us say, in the exercise of their religion,” Gerald suggested, “for
I wholly understand you, sir.”

“It has followed that the taste of these ladies has become more
delicate. It has followed that, by force of considering their own
feminine loveliness, always unveiled and in lively employment, and by
comparing it so intimately and so jealously with the loveliness of their
female rivals in the service of the wrinkled goddess, they have become
connoisseurs of the beauties peculiar to their sex. They have acquired a
refinement of taste—”

“To be refined in one’s taste is eminently praiseworthy. Ah, my dear
fellow, if you but knew what shocking examples of bad taste we kings are
continually encountering among our sycophants! And that reminds me, you
said something about a princess—”

“—They have learned to despise the hasty and boisterous and, between
ourselves, the very often disappointing ways of men—”

“Ah, yes, no doubt!” said Gerald. “Men are a bad lot. But we were
speaking of a princess—”

“—And they have lovingly contrived more finespun and more rococo
diversions without the crude assistance of any man. Then also they
delight in playing with many well-trained pets,—with goats and large
dogs and asses and, they tell me, with rams and with bulls also. The
surprising and mysterious joys which blaze up among these flute-players
are, thus, very violent and delicious.”

Gerald said then that kindness to dumb animals was generally reckoned a
most estimable trait in the United States of America. Whereas, in all
quarters of that enlightened and hospitable republic, Gerald estimated,
a princess—

“Yet,” Horvendile went on, “these learned women do not forget, in mere
pleasure-seeking, their religious duty of permitting no man to pass by
unpleased. Go to them, therefore, you will be welcome. Yonder at this
instant a religious festival is preparing. Yonder sweet-voiced Leucosia,
who hereabouts is called Evadne, waits for you—”

“But I have not the honor of knowing this Evadne—”

“She is easily known, by her violet hair and her sharp teeth. Moreover,
Gerald, her wise sisters—Telês, and Parthenopê, and Radnê, and Ligeia,
and Molpê,—all these will greet you with ardor. They will deny to you
no secret of their pious rites; they will share with you esoteric joys
religiously. They will incite you to perform among their choir, in the
most secret shrine of Koleos Koleros—”

“But, really now, my dear fellow! I have no talent whatever for music. I
would be quite out of place in any choir.”

“These flute-players are very ingenious. They will find for you some
suitable instrument. And there will be strange harmonies and much soft
laughter at this festival: each reveller will pour out libations
copiously: cups will be refilled and emptied until dawn. There will be
for you perfumes and rose garlands and the most exquisite of wines and
the most savory of dishes and other delicacies. Due homage will be paid
to Koleos Koleros.”

“Nevertheless,” said Gerald, “there is a phrase which haunts me—”

“That dusky grove of laurels yonder is the hall of this pious feast.
Nothing will be lacking to you at this feast if you attend it with
proper religious exaltation; and you will discover abilities there which
will surprise you.”

“Ah, as to that now, Horvendile—! Yes, I have a man’s proper share of
ability, I have quite enough ability for two persons. Nevertheless,
there is a patriotic phrase which haunts me, and that phrase is _E
pluribus unum_. For I have compunctions, Horvendile, which are
translating that same phrase, a little freely, as ‘One among so many.’”

“It seems to me a harmless phrase even in your paraphrase. More harm may
very well come of the fact that these learned ladies will endeavor to
cajole you out of the divine steed, so that he may be added to their
trained pets—”

“Oh! oh, indeed!” said Gerald. “But that is nonsense. The rider upon
Kalki, and none other, has to fulfil that estimable old prophecy: and a
deal of good such wheedlings will do any woman breathing, with a fine
kingdom like that of mine set against a mere kiss or, it may be, a few
tears!”

“That matter remains to be attested in due time. Meanwhile, I can but
repeat that if you do not render a man’s homage to the ruler of this
place there is no doubt whatever that the slighted goddess will avenge
herself.”

“Sir,” Gerald now replied, with appropriate dignity, “I am, as were my
fathers before me, a member of the Protestant Episcopal church. Is it
thinkable that a communicant of this persuasion would worship a goddess
of the benighted heathen? Do you but answer me that very simple
question!”

“In Lichfield,” Horvendile retorted, “to adhere to the religion of your
fathers is tactful, and in this place also, as in every other place,
tactfulness ought to be every wise man’s religion. Otherwise, you will
be running counter to that which is expected of the descendants of
Manuel and of Jurgen; and you may by and by have cause to regret it.”

But Gerald thought of his church, and of its handsome matters of faith
in the way of organ music and of saints’ days and of broad-mindedness
and of delightful lawn-sleeved bishops and of majestic rituals. He
thought of newly washed choir-boys and of his prayer-book’s wonderful
mouth-filling phrases, of rogation days and of ember days and of Trinity
Sunday. He thought about pulpits and hassocks and stained glass and
sextons, and about the Thirty-nine Articles, and about those
unpredictable, superb mathematics which early in every spring
collaborated with the new moon to afford him an Easter: and these things
Gerald could not abandon.

So he said: “No. No, Horvendile! I pay no homage to the wrinkled
goddess.”

Then Horvendile warned him again, “You may find that decision costly.”

“That is as it may be!” said Gerald, with his chin well up. “For a good
Episcopalian, sir, finds in the petulance of no heathen goddess anything
to blench the cheek and make the heart go pitapat.”

Still, he looked rather fondly through the dusk. And now his shoulders
also went up, shruggingly.

“Yet I concede,” said Gerald, “that, howsoever firm my churchmanship,
and even with a princess waiting for me, I am tempted. For yonder
flute-player who still delays to join her companions—who are now, no
doubt, already about their merry games with one another and with their
trained pets,—has charms. Yes, she has charms which give my thoughts,
as it were, a locally religious turn, and make the notion of joining her
a rather beautiful idea. I deplore, of course, her feathered legs. Even
so, she displays, as you too may observe, in her so leisurely retreat,
an opulence in that most engaging kind of beauty which once got for
Aphrodite the epithet of Callipygê. I contemplate, with at least locally
pious joy, the curving of those reins, the whiteness and the fineness of
the skin, and the graciousness of those superb contours, designed
without any stinting or exaggeration, into the perfection of those fair
twin moons of delight—”

But in a moment Gerald said, “Still, there is something vaguely
familiar, a something which chills me—”

And Gerald said also: “Or, rather, in their so gentle undulations as she
walks unhurriedly away from us, in their so amiable convulsions,—in
their heavings, their twitchings, their ripplings and their
twinklings,—rather, do the bewitching and multitudinous movements of
those silvery spheres resemble, to my half dazzled eyes, the
unarithmeticable smiling of the sunlit sea, to which, as you will
remember, Horvendile, old Æschylos has so finely referred. I feel that I
could compose a not discreditable sonnet to that most beautiful of
backsides. There is nothing more poetical than is the backside of a
naked woman who is walking away from you. Its movements awaken the
yearnings of all elegiac verse.... And I do not doubt, sir, that the
front of this feathery-legged lady is fully as enchanting as the rear.
Yes, I imagine that the façade too has its own peculiar attractions: and
I admit, in a word, that I am tempted to confront her—”

Horvendile glanced toward the woman who alone remained within reach.
“That is Evadne, who in the days of her sea-faring was called Leucosia.
And it is plain enough that she waits for temptation to inflame and to
uplift you into raptures somewhat more practical than all this talking.”

“She waits,” said Gerald, “in vain. At this distance she is a rather
beautiful idea: nearer, she would be only another woman with her clothes
off. Moreover, sir, I am a self-respecting member of the Protestant
Episcopal church: and besides that, as I now perceive, it is of Evelyn
Townsend’s figure that this woman’s half-seen figure reminds me. That
resemblance makes for every sedentary virtue. I have learned only too
well what comes of permitting any female person to trust you and to give
you all. Then, too, I am called to duties of more honor and
responsibility in my appointed kingdom. And for the rest, I prefer to
disappoint these ladies by failing in ardor at such a distance as will
not provoke my blushes. No, Horvendile: no, I am still haunted by that
patriotic phrase _E pluribus unum_; and I shall not just now presume to
render a man’s homage to Koleos Koleros, among quite so many
flute-players. Moreover, you assert that a princess is waiting for me,
to whom I prefer to present the member of another royal house in the
full possession of all faculties. So I do not elect, just now, to share
in these—if you will permit the criticism,—somewhat un-American
methods of religious exercise. I ask, instead, that you conduct me to
the impatient princess about whom you keep talking so obstinately that,
I perceive, there is no least hope of my stopping you.”

It was in this way that Gerald began his journey by putting an affront
upon Koleos Koleros.




                              PART THREE
                          THE BOOK OF DOONHAM

               “Though a Woman’s Tongue be but Three
               Inches Long, It can kill a Six-foot Man.”




                                   7.
                    Evasherah of the First Water-Gap


“A GOOD-MORNING to you, ma’am,” Gerald had begun. His horse was
tethered to a palm-tree, and Horvendile was gone, so that there now was
only the Princess to be considered. “And in what way can I be of any
service?”

Yet his voice shook, as he stood there beside the alabaster couch....
For Gerald was enraptured. The Princess Evasherah was, in the dawn of
this superb May morning, so surpassingly lovely that she excelled all
the other women his gaze had ever beheld. Her face was the proper shape,
it was appropriately colored everywhere, and it was surmounted with an
adequate quantity of hair. Nor was it possible to find any defect in her
features. The colors of this beautiful young girl’s two eyes were nicely
matched, and her nose stood just equidistant between them. Beneath this
was her mouth, and she had also a pair of ears. In fine, the girl was
young, she exhibited no deformity anywhere, and the enamored glance of
the young man could perceive in her no fault. She reminded him, though,
of someone that he had known....

Such were the ardent reflections which had passed through Gerald’s mind
in the while that he said decorously, “A good-morning, ma’am: and in
what way can I be of any service?”

But the Princess, in her impetuous royal fashion, had wasted no time
upon the formal preliminaries which were more or less customary in
Lichfield. And while Gerald’s patriotic republican rearing had been
explicit enough as to the goings-on in monarchical families, he was
whole-heartedly astounded by the animation and candor which here
confronted him. There was no possible doubting that the Princess
Evasherah was prepared to trust him and to give him all.

“But, oh, indeed, ma’am,” Gerald said, “you quite misunderstand me!”

For he had it now. This woman was uncommonly like Evelyn Townsend.

Gerald sighed. All ardor had departed from him. And with a few
well-chosen words he placed their relationship upon a more decorous
basis.

Now the Princess Evasherah, that most lovely Lady of the Water-Gap, was
lying down even when Gerald first came to her, just after sunrise. She
was lying upon a couch of alabaster, which had four legs made of
elephants’ tusks. Upon this couch was a mattress covered with green
satin and embroidered with red gold; upon the mattress was the Princess
Evasherah in a brief shirt of apricot colored silk; and, over all, was a
saffron canopy adorned with fig-leaves worked in pearls and emeralds.

This couch was furthermore shaded by three palm-trees, and it stood near
to the bank of the river called Doonham. And by the sparkling ripples of
that river’s deep waters—as the Princess Evasherah explained, some
while after she and Gerald had reached a friendly and clean-minded
understanding, with no un-American nonsense about it,—was hidden the
residence of the Princess, where presently they would have breakfast.

“But,” Gerald said, a little dejectedly, “I have just now no appetite of
any kind.”

“That will not matter,” said the Princess: and for no reason at all she
laughed.

“—And to live under the water, ma’am, appears a virtually unprecedented
form of royal eccentricity—”

“Ah, but I must tell you, lord of the age, and most obdurate averter
from the desirer of union with him, that very long ago, because of a
girlish infatuation for a young man whose name I have forgotten, I
suffered a fiery downfalling from the Home of the Heavenly Ones, into
the waters of this river. For I had offended my Father (whose name be
exalted!) by stealing six drops of quite another kind of water, of the
water from the Churning of the Ocean—”

“Eh?” Gerald said, “but do you mean the divine Amrita?”

“Garden of my joys, and summit of sagacity,” the Princess remarked, “you
are learned. You have knowledge of heavenly matters, you have traversed
the Nine Spaces. And I perceive that you who travel overburdened with
unresponsiveness upon this road of the gods are yet another god in
disguise.”

“Oh, no, ma’am, it is merely that, as a student of magic, one picks up
such bits of information. I am the heir apparent to a throne, I cannot
honestly declare myself any more than that: and I am upon my way to
enter into my kingdom, but it is not, I am tolerably certain, a
celestial kingdom.”

The Princess was not convinced. “No, my preceptor and my only idol, it
is questionless you are a god, all perfect in eloquence and in grace, a
temptation unto lovers, and showing as a visible paradise to the
desirous. Here, in any event, out of my keen regard for your virtues,
and in exchange for that great gawky horse of yours which reveals in
every feature its entire unworthiness of contact with divine buttocks,
here are the five remaining drops, in this little vial—”

Gerald inspected the small crystal bottle quite as sceptically as the
Princess had regarded his disclaimer of being a god. “Well, now, ma’am,
to me this looks like just ordinary water.”

She placed one drop of the water upon her finger-tip. She drew upon his
forehead the triangle of the male principle, she drew the female
triangle, so that one figure interpenetrated the other, and she invoked
Monachiel, Ruach, Achides, and Degaliel. No student of magic could fail
to recognize her employment of an interesting if uncanonical variant of
the Third Pentacle of Venus, but Gerald made no comment.

After that the Princess Evasherah laughed merrily. “Now, then, companion
of my heart, now that you have promised me that utterly contemptible
horse of yours, I unmask you. For I perceive that you, O my master, more
comely than the moon, are the predestined Redeemer of Antan—”

“That much, ma’am, I already know—”

“In short,” said the Princess, “you are Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and
Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved of Heavenly
Ones, thus masked in human flesh and in human forgetfulness and in
peculiarly unhuman coldness. Yet very soon the power of the Amrita will
have bestowed unfailing vigorousness upon your thinking, and presently
the hounds of recollection will have run down the hare of your
inestimable glory.”

“That is well said, ma’am. It is spoken with a fine sense of style. And
I conjecture that, although the better stylists usually omit this
ingredient, it has some meaning also.... Yes, you do allude to my having
red hair, but the hare of my inestimable glory, which you likewise
mention, is not capillary, but zoölogical,—in addition to being also
metaphorical.... You state, in brief, in a figurative Oriental way, that
by and by I shall recollect something which I have forgotten.... But
just what is it, ma’am, that you so confidently expect me to recollect?”

“My lord, and acme of my contentment, you will recall, for one matter,
the love that was between us in this world’s infancy, when you did not
avert from me the inspiring glances of fond affection. For you, the
bright-tressed, the resplendent, are unmistakably the Well-beloved of
Heavenly Ones. I perfectly remember you, by your high nose, by your
jutting chin, and by the eminence of yet another feature whose noble
proportions also very deeply delighted me during my visit to your
Dirghic paradise, and which I perceive to remain unabatedly heroic.”

Gerald, gently, but with decision, took hold of her hand. It seemed to
him quite time.

Then the fair Lady of the Water-Gap, she who would have been so adorable
if only she had not reminded Gerald more and more of Evelyn Townsend,
began to talk about matters which Gerald as yet really did not remember.

She spoke of Gerald’s golden and high-builded home, in which, it seemed,
this Princess had trusted him and had given him all: and she spoke also
of the unresting love for mankind which had led Gerald to quit that
exalted home, among the untroubled lotus-ponds of Vaikuntha, upon nine
earlier occasions, and of his nine fine exploits in the way of
redemption.

She spoke of how Gerald had visited men sometimes in his present heroic
and elegant form, at other times in the appearance of a contemptible
looking dwarf, and upon yet other occasions as a tortoise and as a boar
pig and as a lion and as a large fish. His taste in apparel seemed as
fickle as his charitableness was firm. For over and over again, the
Princess said, it had been the power of Gerald, as Helper and Preserver,
which had prevented several nations and a dynasty or two of gods from
being utterly destroyed by demons whom Gerald himself had destroyed. It
was Gerald, as he learned now, who had preserved this earth alike from
depopulation and from ignorance, when during the first great flood the
Lord of the Third Truth, in his incarnation as a great fish, had carried
through the deluge seven married couples and four books containing the
cream of earth’s literature: whereas, later, during a yet more severe
inundation, Gerald had held up the earth itself between his tusks,—this
being, of course, in the time of his incarnation as a boar pig,—and
swimming thus, had preserved the endangered planet from being as much as
mildewed.

And Evasherah spoke also of how when Gerald was a tortoise he had
created such matters as the first elephant, the first cow, and the first
wholly amiable woman. He had created at the same time, she added, the
moon and the great jewel Kaustubha and a tree called Parijata, which
yielded whatever was desired of it, and it was then also that
Fair-haired Hoo, the Well-beloved Lord of the Third Truth, had invented
drunkenness. There had been, in all, Evasherah concluded, nineteen
supreme and priceless benefits invented by Gerald at this time, but she
confessed her inability to recall offhand everyone of them—

“It is sufficient,—oh, quite sufficient!” Gerald assured her, with
wholly friendly condescension, “for already, ma’am, it embarrasses me to
have my modest philanthropies catalogued.”

Yet Gerald, howsoever lightly he spoke, was thrilled with not
uncomplacent pride in his past. He was not actually surprised, of
course, because logic had already pointed out that the ruler of Antan
would very naturally be a divine personage with just such a magnificent
past. To be a god appeared to him a rather beautiful idea. So he first
asked what was the meaning of that skull over yonder in the grass: the
Princess explained that it was not her skull, but had been left there by
a visitor some two months earlier: and then Gerald, after having agreed
with her that people certainly ought to be more careful about their
personal belongings, went on with what was really in his mind.

“In any event, ma’am,” he hazarded, with the brief cough of diffidence,
“it seems there have been tender passages between us before this
morning—”

“I trusted you! I gave you all!” she said, reproachfully. “But you,
disposer of supreme delights, and fair vase of my soul, you have
forgotten even the way you used to take advantage of my confidence! For
how can the modesty of a frail woman avail against the brute strength of
a determined man!”

“No, Evelyn, not to-night—I beg your pardon, ma’am! My mind was astray.
What I meant to say was that I really must request you to desist.” Then
Gerald went on, tenderly: “To the contrary, my dear lady, our love stays
unforgettable. I recall every instant of it, I bear in mind even that
sonnet which I made for you on the evening of my first respectful
declaration of undying affection.”

“Ah, yes, that lovely sonnet!” the Princess remarked, with the
uneasiness manifested by every normal woman when a man begins to talk
about poetry.

“—And to prove it, I will now recite that sonnet,” Gerald said.

And he did.

Yet his voice was so shaken with emotion that, when he had completed the
octave, Gerald paused, because it was never within Gerald’s power to
resist the beauty of a sublime thought when it was thus adequately
expressed in flawless verse. So for an instant he stayed silent.

He caught up the lovely, always straying hands of the Princess
Evasherah, of this impulsive and investigatory lady, who so troublingly
resembled Evelyn Townsend, and Gerald pressed these hands to his
trembling lips. This lovely girl, returned to him almost miraculously,
it might seem, out of his well-nigh forgotten past, was not merely
intent once more to trust him and to give him all. She trusted also, as
Gerald felt with that keen penetration which is natural to divine
beings, to delude and to wheedle him into some material loss. What the
Princess desired to cajole him out of was, perhaps, not wholly clear.
Nevertheless, he felt that, in some way or another way, Evasherah was
attempting to deceive him. It might be that neither her explanation as
to that skull nor even her so candid seeming adoration of his wisdom and
his comeliness was entirely sincere. For women were like that: they did
not always mean every word they said, not even when they were addressing
a god. And so, the gods had over-painful duties laid upon them, Gerald
decided.

After that he sighed: and he continued the reciting of his sonnet with
an air of lofty resignation, with which was intermingled a certain
gustatory approval of really good verse.

“Light of my universe, that is a very beautiful sonnet,” the Princess
remarked, when he had finished, “and I am proud to have inspired it, and
I am almost equally proud of the fact that you (through whose supreme
elegance and amiable aspect my heart is once more rent with ecstasy)
should remember it so well after these thousands of years.”

“Years mean very little, ma’am, to Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and
Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved of Heavenly
Ones: and centuries are, quite naturally, powerless to dim my memories
of any matter in any way pertaining to you. Yet affairs of minor
importance do rather tend to become a bit ambiguous as the æons slip
by.... For example, what, in the intervals between my redemptory
exploits—upon mere week days, as it were,—what do I happen to be the
god of?”

“That,” said the Princess, “O my master, and pure fountain-head of every
virtue, is a peculiarly silly question to be coming from you, who are,
as everybody knows, the Lord of the Third Truth.”

“Ah, yes, to be sure,—of the Third Truth! My divine interests are
invested in veracity. Well, that is highly gratifying. Yet, ma’am, there
are a great many gods, and it is a rather beautiful idea to observe
that, even where their professional spheres are the same, these gods
differ remarkably. Thus, Vulcan is the lord of one fire, and Vesta of
another, but Agni and Fudo and Satan rule over yet other fires, each
wholly individual. Cupid and Lucina traffic in the same port, but not in
the same way. Æolus controls twelve winds, and Tezcatlipoca four winds,
and Crepitus only one wind—”

“Director of my life, and comely shepherd of my soul, I know. Few gods
are strange to me or to my embraces. Many a Heavenly One has invited me
to love, and I have yielded piously: my kisses have written the tale of
my religious transports upon many divine cheeks.”

“—And I imagine that this water from the Churning of the Ocean was not
intended, in the first place, to further my apotheosis. I mean, ma’am, I
do not suppose you went to the trouble of stealing six drops of the
Amrita in order just to recall to me that divinity which, in the press
of other affairs, I had somehow permitted to slip my mind?”

“Disposer and sole archetype of the seven magnanimities, you speak the
truth. For the five remaining drops, as I was trying to tell you when
you kept interrupting me, O my lord, and beloved of my heart, and joy of
both my eyes, were intended for the five human senses of the young man
about whom I was then rather foolish; and upon whom I meant to bestow
immortality and eternal youth. The first drop, inasmuch as the Amrita
confers a never-ending vigorousness, I had of course already placed. So
my Father (whose name be exalted!) smote us both with lightnings, in his
impetuous way, and tumbled us both from out of the Home of the Heavenly
Ones into this river. My young man was thus drowned before I had the
chance to confer upon him any of the favors which I greatly fear your
superior strength and your pertinacity are now about to force from me—”

Gerald replied: “I really do think you would get on far more quickly
with your story if you were to keep both of these like this. The
position, you see, is much more American: it lacks that earlier air of
such personal freedom as a democracy does not think well of.”

“Light of the age, I hear and I obey. Yet all my tale has been revealed
to your consideration—”

“Yes,” Gerald assented, “but your history interests me far more—”

“Far more than what, O cruel and resplendent one?”

“Why, far more than I can say, of course. So let us get on with it!”

“But my sad history is now as refined glass before your discerning
glance. It suffices to add that the immortal part of my young man was
happily removed from the waters of this river, and is now worshipped as
a god in Lytreia. But for me, alas! the squirrel of calamity continued
to revolve in the cage of divine wrath. For, so perfectly ridiculous is
the way my Father (whose name be exalted!) behaves when the least thing
upsets him, that I was condemned through the length of nine thousand
years to assume certain official duties in the waters of this river, in
the repugnant shape of a crocodile.”

But with that statement Gerald took prompt issue. “What may be your
official duties as the guardian of these waters I can no more guess than
I can guess how your visitors happen to be so careless about leaving
their skulls behind. That really is a sort of slapdash and inconsiderate
behavior which I cannot condone without considerable reflection. But I
do know that the shape which I have beheld, and still see a great deal
of, in nothing resembles the shape of a crocodile.”

“Epitome of every excellence, and exalted zenith of my existence, that
is because the nine thousand years of my doom have now happily expired.
The proof of this is that already my luckless substitute arrives. We
shall now behold her encounter with the terminator of delights and the
separator of companions. Thereafter, when we have had breakfast, O vital
spirit of my heart, whom my unmitigated love incites me to devour out of
pure affection, I shall ride hence upon the horse with which you have so
gallantly presented me, to enter again into the Home of the Heavenly
Ones.”

With that, the Princess pointed.




                                   8.
                      The Mother of Every Princess


WITH that, the Princess pointed. And Gerald also now looked toward the
river.... He viewed an unsolid-seeming world of dimly colored movings.
Directly before him the deep river sparkled and rippled eastward with
unhurried, very shallow undulations. But, under the sun’s warmth, mists
rising everywhere above the waters streamed eastward too, unhastily, and
in such unequal volume that now this and now another portion of the wide
landscape beyond the river was irregularly glimpsed and then, gradually
but with a surprising quickness, veiled. Very lovely medallions of green
lawns and shrubbery and distant hills thus seemed to take form and then
to dissolve into the mists’ incessant gray flowing, toward the newly
risen sun....

And Gerald also saw that, some fifty feet away from him, an unusually
unclad elderly woman was approaching the river bank, carrying in her
thin arms a child. The woman trudged forward toward the river like a
drugged person, because of the doom which was upon her.

Now this woman seemed to stumble, and she fell into the water, but in
falling she cast the child from her, so that it remained safe in the
coarse tall-growing grass.

The woman whom divine will had led hither to serve as a scapegoat for
the Princess Evasherah proceeded to drown satisfactorily, and with
indeed a sort of decorum. She sank twice, with hardly any beating or
splashing of the waters, because of that doom which was upon her. The
child, though, whom no long years of living had taught to accept a
preponderance of unpleasant happenings, screamed continuously, in
candid, mewing disapproval of divine will.

Out of the near-by reeds came a bright-eyed jackal; and it furtively
approached the child.

The Princess rose from the alabaster couch and from Gerald’s partially
detaining arms. She stood for an instant irresolute. In her lovely face
was trouble. Her mouth, a little open, trembled. Gerald liked that. Here
was revealed the ever-tender heart of womanhood and the quick generous
sympathy with all afflicted persons which living had taught him to look
for only in the best literature.

The Princess quitted Gerald. She hastened to the river bank. The jackal
backed from her, crouching in a half-circle, with bared teeth, and the
reeds swallowed the beast. The Princess leaned down, and with a lovely
gesture of compassion the Princess caught the drowning woman by one hand
and assisted her ashore.

It was then that the Princess Evasherah cried out in wordless surprise.
Then too her raised hands clenched, and her little fists jerked downward
in a gesture of candid exasperation.

And then also the woman whom the Princess had just saved from drowning
unfastened the small copper bowl and the knife which hung by copper
chains about her waist. The Princess took these, she approached the
wailing child, she stooped, and the crying ceased. The Princess returned
to the strange woman, calling out, “Hrang, hrang!” To the gray lips of
this woman Evasherah applied the blood which was now in the copper bowl,
and the remainder of the child’s blood she sprinkled over the woman’s
unveiled breasts and between the woman’s legs, which were held wide
apart for this fecundation.

“Hail, Mother!” said Evasherah. “All hail, O red and wrinkled Mother of
Every Princess! Hail, patient and insatiable Havvah! A salutation to
thee! Spheng, spheng! a salutation to thee, and all delight to thee for
a thousand years of thy Wednesdays! Drink deep, beloved and wise Mother,
for an oblation of blood which has been rendered pure by holy texts is
more sweet than ambrosia.”

At first the elder lady had seemed peculiarly red and inflamed and
hideous among her tousled tresses. Now she was placated, she panted, and
her eyes rolled languorously. She began, with aggrieved reproach, “But,
O my dearie! you have relapsed into a masculine display of clemency such
as has flung away your allotted chance of redemption.”

“Sorrow and mourning reside in my heart, O my Mother: my limbs are
rendered infirm by remorse. For I had no least notion it was you. I
thought only that some mortal woman was to take over my duties in the
repulsive shape of a crocodile; and I could not bear to hear the small
voice of the little child crying out as the sharp jackal teeth drew
nearer, and to reflect that I was destroying two lives in order to
purchase my freedom from this endless love-making and over-eating.”

“But it was a boy child. Dearie, you are talking as though these sons of
Adam were of real importance. And to hear you, nobody would ever give
you your due credit for having piously ended the ambitions of so many
hundreds of them, since you have protected the entrance to the road of
gods and myths against the impudence of these romantics.”

“Yet, refuge of the uplifted, and asylum of the vigorous, the persons
whose blood has nourished my exile were all young men aflame with impure
intentions. And a child is different. It is not right that the stainless
flesh of a little boy, which is an offering acceptable to all our
exalted race, should be torn by the long teeth of an undomesticated
dog.”

“That is true. That is alike a truthful and a pious reflection. A child
is different from all other afflictions, because a child alone can
always be an endless and a quite new sort of trouble. That nobody knows
better than I who am the Mother of Every Princess, with my daughters
everywhere policing the wild dreams of men so inadequately. Yet a thing
done has an end. And it may be that by and by I can get around your
Father—”

“Whose name be exalted!” remarked Evasherah.

“That also, dearie, is a wholly proper observation,—though, as I was
saying, you know as well as I do how pig-headed he is. Meanwhile, there
is nothing left for you, for the present, save another incarnation, and
another century or two of seductiveness upon the verge of Doonham.”

“But I have been,” observed the Princess, “a crocodile professionally
for nine thousand years, for all that my chest is so delicate. The cats
of conjecture are therefore abroad in the meadows of my meditation
purring that this time I would prefer something a little less damp.”

“Dearie, since your next incarnation is but a matter of form, do you by
all means please yourself, so that you stay a destruction to young men
and to their upsetting aspirations. You have been wholly inadequate this
morning, I observe—”

“Why, but—” said the abashed Princess.

Her voice sank as she went on rather ruefully with a talking which to
Gerald was now inaudible. He could merely see that the elder lady had
hazarded a suggestion which Evasherah at once dismissed with an emphatic
toss of her lovely head. He saw too the Princess place together the
palms of her hands and then draw them about seven inches apart.

“Oh, fully that, at first!” she stated, in the raised tones of mild
exasperation, “so that, altogether, this unresponsive person (within
whose ancestral tomb may all goats propagate!) remains quite
incomprehensible.”

The old woman replied: “In any event, you have failed; but that does not
really matter. He travels, you assure me, with his assured betrayer. And
the road he follows, that also, is lively enough and long enough to
betray him in the end. For he will meet others of my daughters; and if
all else fails, he will meet me.”

“The ship of my enduring resolution is not yet wrecked upon the iceberg
of his indifference; and I am not through with him, by any means. I am
returning to this unremunerative occupier of my couch,—for breakfast, O
my Mother,” the Princess added, with a merry laugh.

And the old lady answered her with a mother’s ever-responsive
tenderness. “That is my own child. One has to persevere with these
romantics, no matter how hard the task may seem. For none of us knows
yet what these romantic men desire. My daughters prepare for them fine
food and drink, my daughters see to it that their homes are snug, and at
the end of each day my daughters love them dutifully. All things that
men can ask for, my daughters furnish them. Why need so many of these
men nurse strange desires which do not know their aim? for how can any
of my daughters content such desires?”

“One can but summon, O my Mother, the terminator of delights and the
separator of companions and the ender of all desires.”

“There are other ways, my dearie, which are more subtle. That way is of
the East, that way is old and crude. Still, that way also quiets
over-ambitious dreaming; and that way serves.”

Gerald blinked. He was a bit troubled by the matter-of-fact occurrence
before his eyes of a perfectly incredible happening.

For the elder lady became transfigured. She became larger, all ruddiness
went away from her, and she took on the black and livid coloring of a
thunder cloud. In her left hand she now carried a pair of scales and a
yardstick. Her face smiled rather terribly as she steadily grew larger.
Her necklace, you perceived, was made of human skulls, and each of her
earrings was the dangling corpse of a hanged man in a very poor state of
preservation. Altogether, it was not a grief to Gerald when the Mother
of Every Princess had attained to her full heavenly stature, and had
vanished.

But the Lady of the Water-Gap was changed in quite another fashion.
Where she had stood now fluttered a large black and yellow butterfly.




                                   9.
                        How One Butterfly Fared


SO it was in the shape of a large butterfly that Evasherah returned
toward Gerald, to careen and drift affectionately about him, in a
bewildering medley of bright colors. He cried to her adoringly, “My
darling—!” He grasped at her: and she did not avoid him.

Gerald now held this lovely creature, by the throat, at arm’s length. He
began the compelling words, “Schemhamphoras—” And in Gerald’s face was
no adoration whatever.

Instead, he continued, rather sadly, “—Eloha, Ab, Bar, Ruachaccocies—”
and so went through the entire awful list, ending by and by with
“Cados.”

His prey was now struggling frantically. The unreflective girl had not
allowed for her lover’s being a student of magic. And her restiveness
was—well, it might be, pardonably,—a bit interfering with Gerald’s
æsthetic delight, now that he paused to admire the splendor of the
trapped Princess’s last incarnation, before he used the fatal Hausa
charm.

For Evasherah’s wings were of a wonderful velvety black and a fiery
orange color, her body was golden, and her breast crimson. He noted also
that Evasherah, in her increasing agitation of mind, had thrust out from
the back of her neck a soft forked horn which diffused a horrible odor.

And those curved, strong, needle-sharp fangs which were striking vainly
at him were so adroitly designed that Gerald fell now to marveling,
still a little sadly, at their superb efficiency. A yellowish oil oozed
from their tips. They had, he saw, just the curve of two cat claws:
whensoever such fangs struck flesh, their victim’s recoil would but
clamp fangs which were shaped like that more deeply and more venomously;
it was a quite ingenious arrangement. It perfectly explained, too, how
the visitors of this soft-spoken, cuddling and utterly adorable Princess
happened to leave their skulls in the thick grass around her alabaster
couch.

Then Gerald said: “O Butterfly, O Gleaming One, your breakfast this day
is disappointment, your fork is agony, and your napkin death. O
Butterfly, repent truly, abandon falsehood, put away deceit and
flattery, cease thinking about your deluded lovers even remorsefully.
Repent in verity, do not repent like the wildcat which repents with the
fowl in its mouth without putting the fowl down. Where now is the
artfulness which was yours, where are the high-hearted, tricked
lovers?—To-day all lies in the tomb. This world, O Butterfly, is a
market-place: everyone comes and goes, both stranger and citizen. The
last of your lovers is a pious friend, he assists the decreed course of
this world.”

Still, it was rather strange that the body she had chosen appeared to
belong to the species _Onithoptera crœsus_,—Gerald decided, as his foot
crushed the squeaking soft remnants and rubbed all into a smeared paste
of blood and gold-dust,—because, of course, this kind of butterfly was
more properly indigenous to the Malay Archipelago than to these parts,
over and above the fact that for any butterfly to have the fangs of a
serpent was false entomology.

However, the geography and local customs and all else which pertained to
the Marches of Antan were tinged with some perceptible inconsequence,
Gerald reflected, as he returned to his tethered stallion. He mounted
then, cheered with the yet further reflection that he had got from
Evasherah the rather beautiful idea of being a god, and had got also the
four remaining drops from the Churning of the Ocean. The properties of
this water were sufficiently well known to every student of magic.




                               PART FOUR
                          THE BOOK OF DERSAM

                        “What Has a Blind Man
                        to Do with Any Mirror?”




                                  10.
                           Wives at Caer Omn


NOW Gerald mounted on the stallion Kalki, and Gerald traveled upon the
way of gods and myths, down a valley of cedar-trees, into the realm of
Glaum of the Haunting Eyes. The land of Dersam was already falling away
into desolation, because of the disappearance of its liege-lord into
mortal living. And at Caer Omn, which formerly had been the Sylan’s
royal palace, and where Gerald got his breakfast, the three hundred and
fifty-odd concubines of Glaum were about their cooking and cleaning and
nursing, but the seven wives of Glaum sat together in a walled garden.

Six of these wives were young and comely, but the seventh seemed—to
Gerald’s finding,—as wrinkled as a wet fishnet, and as old as envy.

By the half-dozen who retained their youth, however, Gerald was
enraptured. As he looked from one of them to the other, each in her turn
appeared so surpassingly lovely that she excelled all the other women
his gaze had ever beheld.... But, no! Glaum was his benefactor. Glaum at
this instant, in Lichfield, was toiling away at that unfinished romance
about Dom Manuel of Poictesme which by and by was to make the name of
Gerald Musgrave famous everywhere. It would, therefore, never do to
encourage these so shapely and chromatically meritorious dears to follow
out the dictates of womanly confidence and generosity to the point where
they could bleat about it. No, to permit them all to deceive one husband
would be an unfriendly and injudicious pleonasm, Gerald reflected. And
Gerald sighed whole-heartedly.

The seven women had sighed earlier. “What else is now come to trouble
us?” said the wives of the Sylan when Gerald came.

He answered them, with a great voice: “Ladies, I am Fair-haired Hoo, the
Helper and the Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved
of Heavenly Ones. Yet, I pray you, do not be unduly alarmed by this
revelation! I am not a ruthless deity, I deal fiercely with none save my
misguided opponents. I, in a word, am he of whom it was prophesied that
I, my dear ladies, or perhaps I ought to say that he—although, to be
sure, it does not really matter which pronoun a strict grammarian would
prefer, since in any case the meaning is unmistakable and very
sublime,—would at his or at my appointed season appear, in unexampled
and appropriate splendor, to reign over Antan, riding upon the silver
stallion Kalki.”

But the wives of Glaum seemed unimpressed. “Your meaning, sir,” said one
of them, “may be terrible, but certainly it is not plain.”

This wife had reddish golden hair, uncovered: she wore a blue gown, so
fashioned that it left her right breast wholly uncovered also; and,
doubtless for some sufficient purpose, she carried an iron candlestick
with seven branches.

Gerald asked, with indignation tempered by her good looks: “And do you
doubt my divine word? Do you dispute my Dirghic godhead?”

Another wife answered him, a glorious dark sultry creature in purple,
who wore a semi-circular crown and had about the upper part of each bare
arm two broad gold bands.

She said: “Why should we question that? Gods by the score and by the
hundreds, gods in battalions, have passed through the land of Dersam,
going downward toward Antan, to enter into well-earned rest after their
long labors in this world.”

“Ah, so it appears that Antan is the heaven of all deserving gods, and
that I am to rule a celestially populated kingdom well worthy of me!”

“We have not ever been to Antan. We thus know nothing of its customs. We
know only that many gods have passed us, traveling upon all manner of
steeds as they went down into Antan. Bes rode upon a cat, and Tlaloc
upon a stag, and Siva upon a bull: we have seen Kali pass upon the back
of a tiger: above our heads Zeus has gone by upon the back of an eagle,
as he traveled abreast with Amen-Ra upon the back of a very large
beetle. We therefore think it likely enough that you who pass upon this
shining horse are yet another one of these gods. What are the gods to
us, in this our season of unexampled trouble?”

Then the seven wives fell into a lamentation, and their complaining was
that, since Glaum of the Haunting Eyes had left them, the sacred mirror
reflected only the person who stood before it.

“And is not such the nature of all mirrors?” Gerald asked.

“Oh, sir,” replied the wife who carried a bunch of keys, and who wore
that unaccountable tall bifurcated orange-colored headdress, “but until
yesterday ours was the mirror which showed things as they ought to be.”

“And what did one discover in it?”

Now the old wife spoke. Her head was wrapped in a white turban; her face
had no more color than has the belly of a fish; and a sprinkling of
white hairs, so long that they had grown into spirals and half-circles,
glittered upon her shaking chin. “To the aged, such as I have now
become, the Mirror of Caer Omn reveals nothing any more: but to the
young, such as we all were before Glaum left us, it was used to reveal
that which may not be described.”

“Then why do you not place before it some young person—?”

“Alas, sir, but there is no longer any co-respondent youth in the
mirror!”

The speaker was the brown-haired and alluringly plump wife who wore
nothing at all anywhere, and whose delicious body had been depilated in
every needful place.

Then the seven wives of Glaum of the Haunting Eyes raised a lament; and
now the pallid sharp-nosed wife who was far gone in pregnancy, and who
wore that maroon-colored headdress shaped like a cone, began to speak of
the young fellows who had been used to come to them out of the sacred
mirror.

She spoke of very handsome, tall, brisk, nimble, impudent young fellows,
that had been always jolly and buxom and jaunty, and not ever grumpish
like a husband; of over-rash young fellows who must have their flings,
who stuck at nothing, who went to all lengths, who had a finger in every
pie, who kept the pot a-boiling; of what forward, eager, pushing,
plodding, thwacking, negligent of no corner, business-like,
never-wearying, soul-stirring workmen they had been at every job they
undertook; of what great plagues they had been, too, without the least
bit of any patience or of any modesty; and of how unreasonably you
missed these sad rapscallions now that there was no longer any
co-respondent youth remaining in the sacred Mirror of Caer Omn.

Gerald replied: “Your plaint is very moving. I regard a mirror which
begets any such young fellows as a rather beautiful idea. It is true
that I am a bachelor who therefore object to no reasonable mitigation of
matrimony. But I am also a god, dear ladies, a god who brings all youth
with me here in this vial.”

At that the last wife spoke. Her hair was flaxen; her body was
everywhere engagingly visible through her gown, of a transparent soft
green tissue; she carried a small golden-hilted sword. And this wife
said:

“You differ, then, from those other gods who have passed this way. No
youth went with these gods, who had themselves grown old and tired and
more feeble, and who journeyed toward a resting from all miracles and
away from a world wherein they were no longer worshipped.”

“But I,” said Gerald, “I am a god who is, moreover, a citizen of the
United States of America, wherein every sort of religion yet flourishes
as it can never do in an effete and sophisticated monarchy. So do you
show me the way to the temple of the sacred Mirror of Caer Omn!”




                                  11.
                            The Glass People


THE seven wives conducted Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and the
Preserver, to the Temple of the Mirror. It was the old wife who now
lifted from the mirror a blue veil embroidered with tiny fig-leaves
worked in gold thread. You saw then that this mirror was splotched and
clouded and mildewed. It reflected sallowly a distorted and rather
speckled Gerald: it glistened with an unwholesome iridescence.

Thereafter Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and Preserver, the Lord of the
Third Truth, when he had announced his various titles, with such due
ceremony as befits an exchange of amenities between divine powers,
moistened his finger-tip with one drop of water from the Churning of the
Ocean. Upon the sacred Mirror of Caer Omn he drew with his finger-tip
the triangle of the male and of the female principle, so that the one
interpenetrated the other: and he invoked Monachiel, Ruach, Achides, and
Degaliel.

Then there was never a more inconsequent rejoicing witnessed anywhere
than was made by the seven wives of Glaum of the Haunting Eyes, now that
the sacred mirror was altered, for these seven ungrateful
scatter-brained women were now singing a sort of hymn in honor of the
charitableness and the vigorous procreative powers of the sun.

“But what under the sun has the sun,” said Gerald, a little flustered,
“to do with the not inconsiderable favor which I have conferred upon
this country? And do you think such anatomical details as you are
singing about quite the proper theme for an opera?”

They replied: “Sir, it is obvious that you are a sun god, of the clan of
Far-darting Helios and Freyr the Fond Wooer and the Elder Horus and
Marduk of the Bright Glance, all of whom have ridden this way as they
passed down toward Antan. Sir, it is clear that the Lord of the Third
Truth, also, is a god whose mission it is to awaken warmth and humidity
and a renewal of life in all that he touches—”

“But,” Gerald said, “but with my finger!”

“—Just as,” they concluded, “you have done to this mirror. Therefore,
sir, we are praising your charitableness and your vigorous procreative
powers.”

“Ah, now I comprehend you! Still, let us, in these public choral odes,
let us adhere strictly to the charitableness! Those other solar traits I
would describe as far better adapted to chamber music, in some duet
form. Meanwhile, since this somewhat un-American hymn is intended as a
personal tribute, I accept your really very personal arithmetic in the
proper spirit, dear ladies, as a pious exaggeration. For of course, just
as you say, it does seem fairly obvious I am a sun god.”

Yet Gerald, after all, was now more deeply interested in that huge
mirror than in anything else. He saw that the mirror which they
worshipped in the land of Dersam was not in any way dreadful. If only
the mirror of Freydis was like this, then every inheritance which
awaited him in his appointed kingdom might well be pleasant enough.

For now the Mirror of Caer Omn shone with a golden clear glowing, and in
its depths he viewed with lively admiration a throng of strange and
lovely beings such as he had not known in Lichfield.




                                  12.
                    Confusions of the Golden Travel


BUT when three huge men beckoned to him, and Gerald had moved forward,
he found, with wholly tolerant surprise, that this mirror was in reality
a warmish golden mist, through which he entered into the power of these
three giant blacksmiths, and into the shackles of adamant with which
they bound him fast to a gray, lichen-crusted crag, the topmost crag
above a very wide ravine, among a desert waste of mountain tops; and he
entered, too, into that noble indignation which now possessed Gerald
utterly. For it was Heaven he was defying, he who was an apostate god, a
god unfrightened by the animosity of his divine fellows. He had
preserved, somehow,—in ways which he could not very clearly recall, but
of which he stayed wholly proud,—all men and women from destruction by
the harshness and injustice of Heaven. He only of the gods had pitied
that futile, naked, cowering race which lived, because of their
defencelessness among so many other stronger animals, in dark and
shallow caverns, like ants in an ant-hill. He had made those timid,
scatter-brained, two-legged animals human: he had taught them to build
houses and boats; to make and to employ strong knives and far-smiting
arrows against the fangs and claws with which Heaven had equipped the
other animals; and to tame horses and dogs to serve them in their
hunting for food. He had taught them to write and to figure and to
compound salves and medicines for their hurts, and even to foresee the
future more or less. All arts that were among the human race had come
from Prometheus, and all these benefits were now preserved for his so
inadequate, dear puppets, through the nineteen books in which Prometheus
had set down the secrets of all knowledge and all beauty and all
contentment,—he who after he had discovered to mortals so many
inventions had no invention to preserve himself. Prometheus, in brief,
had created and had preserved men and women, in defiance of Heaven’s
fixed will. For that sacrilege Prometheus atoned, among the ends of
earth, upon this lichen-crusted gray crag. He suffered for the eternal
redemption of mankind, the first of all poets, of those makers who
delight to shape and to play with puppets, and the first of men’s
Saviors. And his was a splendid martyrdom, for the winged daughters of
old Ocean fluttered everywhere about him in the golden Scythian air,
like wailing seagulls, and a grief-crazed woman with the horns of a cow
emerging from her disordered yellow hair paused too to cherish him, and
then went toward the rising place of the sun to endure her allotted
share of Heaven’s injustice.

But he who was the first of poets burst Heaven’s shackles like
packthread, ridding himself of all ties save the little red band which
yet clung about one finger, and rising, passed to his throne between the
bronze lions which guarded each of its six steps, and so sat beneath a
golden disk. All wisdom now belonged to the rebel against Heaven, and
his was all earthly power: the fame of the fine poetry and the
comeliness and the grandeur of Solomon was known in Assyria and Yemen,
in both Egypts and in Persepolis, in Karnak and in Chalcedon, and among
all the isles of the Mediterranean. He sported with genii and with
monsters of the air and of the waters; the Elementals served King
Solomon when he began to build, as a bribe to Heaven, a superb temple
which was engraved and carved and inlaid everywhere with cherubim and
lions and pineapples and oxen and the two triangles. There was no power
like Solomon’s: his ships returned to him three times each year with the
tribute of Nineveh and Tyre and Parvaam and Mesopotamia and Katuar; the
kings of all the world were the servants of King Solomon: the spirits of
fire and the lords of the air brought tribute to him, too, from behind
the Pleiades. His temple now was half completed. But upon his ring
finger stayed always the band of blood-colored asteria upon which was
written, “All things pass away.” These glittering and soft and
sweet-smelling things about him, as he knew always, were only loans
which by and by would be taken away from him by Heaven. He turned from
these transient things to drunkenness and to the embraces of women, he
hunted forgetfulness upon the breasts of nine hundred women, he quested
after oblivion between the thighs of the most beautiful women of Judea
and Israel, of Moab and of Ammon and of Bactria, of Baalbec and of
Babylon: he turned to wantoning with boys and with beasts and with
bodies of the dead. These madnesses enraptured the flesh of Solomon, but
always the undrugged vision of his mind regarded the fixed will of
Heaven, “These things shall pass away.” The temple which he had been
building lacked now only one log to be completed. He cast that gray and
lichen-crusted cedar log into the Pool of Bethesda: it sank as though it
had been a stone: and Solomon bade his Israelites set fire to the temple
which all these years he had been building as a bribe to Heaven.

But when the temple burned, it became more than a temple, for not only
the flanks of Mt. Moriah were ablaze, a whole city was burning there,
and its name was Ilion. He aided in the pillaging of it: the golden
armor of Achilles fell to his share. In such heroic gear, he, like a fox
hidden in a slain lion’s skin, took ship to Ismaurus, which city he
treacherously laid waste and robbed: thence he passed to the land of the
Lotophagi, where he viewed with mildly curious, cool scorn the men who
fed upon oblivion. He was captured by a very bad-smelling, one-eyed
giant, from whom he through his wiles escaped. There was no one anywhere
more quick in wiles than was Odysseus, Laertes’ son. He toiled unhurt
through a nightmare of pitfalls and buffetings, among never-tranquil
seas, outwitting the murderous Laestrigonians, and hoodwinking Circe and
the feathery-legged Sirens and fond Calypso: he evaded the man-eating
ogress with six heads: he passed among the fluttering, gray, squeaking
dead, and got the better of Hades’ sullen overlords and ugly spectres,
through his unfailing wiliness,—he who was still a poet, making the
supreme poem of each man’s journeying through an everywhere inimical and
betraying world, he who was pursued by the wrath of Heaven which
Poseidon had stirred up against Odysseus. But always the wiles of
much-enduring Odysseus evaded the full force of Heaven’s buffetings, so
that in the end he won home to Ithaca and to his meritorious wife; and
then, when the suitors of Penelope had been killed, he went, as dead
Tiresias had commanded, into a mountainous country carrying upon his
shoulder an oar, and leading a tethered ram, for it was yet necessary to
placate Heaven. Beyond Epirus, among the high hills of the Thesproteans,
he sat the oar upright in the stony ground, and turning toward the ram
which he now meant to sacrifice to Poseidon, he found Heaven’s
amiability to remain unpurchased, because the offering of Odysseus, who
was a rebel against Heaven’s will to destroy him, had been refused, and
the ram had vanished.

But in his hand was still the rope with which he had led this ram, and
in his other hand was a bag containing silver money, and in his heart,
now that he had again turned northerly, to find in place of the oar an
elder-tree in flower, now in his heart was the knowledge that no man
could travel beyond him in hopelessness and in infamy. He remembered all
that he had put away, all which he had denied and betrayed, all the
kindly wonders which he had witnessed between Galilee and Jerusalem,
where the carpenters of the Sanhedrin were now fashioning, from a great
lichen-crusted cedar log found floating in the Pool of Bethesda, that
cross which would be set up to-morrow morning upon Mt. Calvary. Then
Judas flung down the accursed silver and the rope with which he had come
hither to destroy himself, because an infamy so complete as his must
first be expressed with fitting words. It was a supreme infamy, it was
man’s masterpiece in the way of iniquity, it was the reply of a very
fine poet to Heaven’s proffered truce after so many æons of tormenting
men causelessly: it was a thing not to be spoken of but sung. He heaped
great sheets of lead upon his chest, he slit the cord beneath his
tongue, he tormented himself with clysters and with purges and in all
other needful ways, so that his voice might be at its most effective
when he sang toward Heaven about his infamy.

But when he sang of his offence against Heaven, he likened his
hatefulness to that of very horrible offenders in yet elder times, he
compared his sin to that of Œdipus who sinned inexpiably with his
mother, and to that of Orestes whom Furies pursued forever because he
had murdered his mother. But it was not of any Jocasta or of any
Clytemnestra he was thinking, rather it was of his own mother, of that
imperious, so beautiful Agrippina whom he had feared and had loved with
a greater passion than anyone ought to arouse in an emperor, and whom he
had murdered. Nothing could put Agrippina out of his thoughts. It
availed no whit that he was lord of all known lands, and the owner of
the one house in the world fit for so fine a poet to live in, a house
entirely overlaid with gold and adorned everywhere with jewels and with
mother of pearl, a house that quite dwarfed the tawdry little Oriental
hovel which Solomon had builded as a bribe to Heaven, because this was a
house so rich and ample that it had three-storied porticos a mile in
length, and displayed upon its front portico not any such trumpery as an
Ark of the Covenant but a colossal statue of that Nero Claudius Cæsar
who was the supreme poet the world had ever known. Yet nothing could put
Agrippina out of Nero’s thoughts. From the satiating of no lust,
howsoever delicate or brutal, and from the committing of no enormity,
and from the loveliness of none of his poems, could he get happiness and
real peace of mind. He hungered only for Agrippina, he wanted back her
detested scoldings and intermeddlings, he reviled the will of Heaven
which had thwarted the desires of a fine poet by making this so
beautiful, proud woman his mother, and he practised those magical rites
which would summon Agrippina from the dead.

But when she returned to him, incredibly beautiful, and pale and proud,
and quite naked, just as he had last seen her when his sword had ripped
open this woman’s belly so that he might see the womb in which he had
once lain, then the divine Augusta drew him implacably downward among
the dead, and so into the corridors of a hollow mountain. This place was
thronged with all high-hearted worshippers of the frightening,
discrowned, imperious, so beautiful woman who had drawn him thither
resistlessly, and in this Hörselberg he lived in continued splendor and
in a more dear lewdness, and he still made songs, only now it was as
Tannhäuser that the damned acclaimed him as supreme among poets. But
Heaven would not let him rest even among these folk who had put away all
thought of Heaven. Heaven troubled Tannhäuser with doubts, with
premonitions, even with repentance. Heaven with such instruments lured
this fine poet from the scented Hörselberg into a bleak snow-wrapped
world: and presently he shivered too under the cold wrath of Pope Urban,
bells rang, a great book was cast down upon the pavement of white and
blue slabs, and the candles were being snuffed out, as the now formally
excommunicated poet fled westerly from Rome pursued by the ever-present
malignity of Heaven.

But from afar he saw the sapless dry rod break miraculously into
blossom, and he saw the messengers of a frightened Bishop of Rome (with
whom also Heaven was having its malicious sport) riding everywhither in
search of him, bearing Heaven’s pardon to the sinner whom they could not
find. For the poet sat snug in a thieves’ kitchen, regaling himself with
its sour but very potent wines and with its frank, light-fingered girls.
Yet a gibbet stood uncomfortably near to the place: upon bright days the
shadow of this gallows fell across the threshold of the room in which
they rather squalidly made merry. Death seemed to wait always within
arm’s reach, pilfering all, with fingers more light and nimble than
those which a girl runs furtively through the pockets of the put-by
clothing of her client in amour. Death nipped the throats of ragged poor
fellows high in the air yonder, and death very lightly drew out of the
sun’s light and made at one with Charlemagne all the proud kings of
Aragon and Cyprus and Bohemia, and death casually tossed aside the
tender sweet flesh which had been as white as the snows of last winter,
and was as little regarded now, of such famous tits as Héloïse and Thaïs
and Queen Bertha Broadfoot. Time was a wind which carried all away. Time
was preparing by and by (still at the instigation of ruthless Heaven) to
make an end even to François Villon, who was still so fine a poet, for
all that time had made of him a wine-soaked, rickety, hairless,
lice-ridden and diseased sneakthief whose food was paid for by the
professional earnings of a stale and flatulent harlot. For time ruined
all: time was man’s eternal strong ravager, time was the flail with
which Heaven pursued all men whom Heaven had not yet destroyed,
ruthlessly.

But time might yet be confounded: and it was about that task he set. For
Mephistophilus had allotted him twenty-four years of wholly untrammeled
living, and into that period might be heaped the spoilage of centuries.
He took unto himself eagle’s wings and strove to fathom all the causes
of the misery which was upon earth and of the enviousness of Heaven.
That which time had destroyed, Johan Faustus brought back into being: he
was a poet who worked in necromancy, his puppets were the most admirable
and lovely of the dead. Presently he was restoring through art magic
even those lost nineteen books in which were the secrets of all beauty
and all knowledge and all contentment, the secrets for which Prometheus
had paid. But the professors at the university would have nothing to do
with these nineteen books. It was feared that into these books restored
by the devil’s aid, the devil might slily have inserted something
pernicious: and besides, the professors said, there were already enough
books from which the students could learn Greek and Hebrew and Latin. So
they let perish again all those secrets of beauty and knowledge and
contentment which the world had long lost. Now Johan Faustus laughed at
the ineradicable folly with which Heaven had smitten all men, a folly
against which the clear-sighted poet fought in vain. But Johan Faustus
at least was wise, and there had never been any other beauty like this
which now stood before him within arm’s reach (as surely as did death),
now that with a yet stronger conjuration he had wrested from
all-devouring time even the beauty of Argive Helen.

But when he would have touched the Swan’s daughter, the delight of gods
and men, she vanished, precisely as a touched bubble is shattered into
innumerable sparkling bits, and over three thousand of them he pursued
and captured in all quarters of the earth, for, as he said of himself,
Don Juan Tenorio had the heart of a poet, which is big enough to be in
love with the whole world, and like Alexander he could but wish for
other spheres to which he might extend his conquests, and each one of
these sparkling bits of womanhood glittered with something of that lost
Helen’s loveliness, yet, howsoever various and resistless were their
charms, and howsoever gaily he pursued them, singing ever-new songs, and
swaggeringly gallant, in his fair, curly wig and his gold-laced coat
adorned with flame-colored ribbons, yet he, the eternal pursuer, was in
turn pursued by the malevolence of Heaven, in, as it seemed, the shape
of an avenging horseman who drew ever nearer unhurriedly, until at last
the clash of rapiers and the pleasant strumming of mandolins were not
any longer to be heard in that golden and oleander-scented
twilight,—because of those ponderous, unhurried hoofbeats, which had
made every other noise inaudible,—and until at last he perceived that
both the rider and the steed were of moving stone, of an unforgotten
stone which was gray and lichen-crusted.

But when fearlessly he encountered the overtowering statue, and had
grasped the horse about its round cold neck, he saw that the stone rider
was lifeless, and was but the dumb and staring effigy of a big man in
armor which was inset with tinsel and with bits of colored glass. It was
the bungled copy and the parody of a magnanimous, great-hearted dream
that he was grasping, and yet it was a part of him, who had been a poet
once, but was now a battered old pawnbroker, for in some way, as he
incommunicably knew, this parodied and not ever comprehended Redeemer
and he were blended, and they were, somehow, laboring in unison to serve
a shared purpose. He derided and he came too near to a mystery which he
distrusted, and which yet (without his preference having been consulted
in the affair) remained a part of him, as it was a part of all poets,
even of a cashiered poet, and a part very vitally necessary to the
existence of a Jurgen. A Jurgen had best not meddle with such matters
one half-second sooner than that dimly foreseen, inevitable need arose
for a Jurgen also to be utilized in the service of this mystery, without
having his preference in the affair consulted. The aging pawnbroker was
a little afraid. He climbed gingerly down from the tall pedestal of
Manuel the Redeemer, he descended from that ambiguous tomb upon which he
was trampling, he stepped rather hastily backward from that carved
fragment of the crag of Prometheus. He stepped backward, treading beyond
the confines of the golden mirror which was worshipped at Caer Omn; and
he was thus released from its magic.




                                  13.
                           Colophon of a God


NOW before him the mirror still glowed goldenly, and now a hunchback
held out both his hands toward Gerald, whom he was trying to allure into
the form and mind of this sardonic, cracker-jawed, sly knave who had
such melancholy eyes. Gerald was much tempted to become this Punch, and
to relive for a little the rascal’s defiant and ever-restless life. And
then too, behind Punch waited tall Merlin, crowned with mistletoe, he
that created all chivalry, and that, being himself the great fiend’s
son, first taught men how to live as became the children of God. It
would be quite entertaining to enter into Merlin’s dark heart. Moreover,
to the other hand of Punch, stood a glittering suave gentleman with a
blue beard, in whose uxoricides it might be vastly interesting to
share....

Yet Gerald, facing these three rather beautiful ideas, was of two minds.
“For I am a god, with a throne awaiting me in Antan, where all the other
gods will be my lackeys,—and, for that matter, with no doubt a whole
cosmos of my own twirling and burning to unheeded clinkers somewhere in
space, which I ought at this moment to be looking after and
embellishing. And in this particular small world which I am quitting,
the powers of Heaven do quite honestly seem—when you look at them from
a perhaps biassed standpoint, that is,—and only to a certain extent, of
course,—and if you are so ill-advised as to consider matters in a
pessimistic, morbid, wholly un-American way—”

Gerald paused. He smilingly shook his red head. “No. It is far better
for us gods not to criticize the handiwork of one another. So I shall
without one word of reproof permit my fellows to play as they like with
this planet called Earth. I shall of course, very probably, make new
planets a bit more conformable to my personal fancy. But I shall say
nothing about the planet I am now quitting at all likely to hurt
anybody’s feelings. No: I shall, rather, rely upon the appealing
eloquence of a dignified silence reinforced by a decisive departure.”

And Gerald said also: “As for this mirror which is worshipped in the
land of Dersam, it pleases me as a toy. But I who am a Savior and a sun
god with nine such very fine exploits behind me, in the way of swimming
and of decimating devils, and of restoring warmth and making moons, and
of really remarkable broad-mindedness as to what particular animal I may
happen to look like,—I, the Helper and the Preserver, who am called to
reign over the goal of all the gods of men,—why, I must necessarily
lose by exchanging such a tremendous destiny for anything to be found in
this mirror.”

Then Gerald said: “No. I must never forget that, whether I am a Savior
or a sun deity, or whether I am habitually used to discharge both
functions, I in any case remain Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and
Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, and so on. I am a most notable
figure, of some sort or another sort, in Dirghic mythology. I am the
appointed rider of the silver stallion. I am destined to inherit from
the Master Philologist the great and best words of magic, and after that
poor hospitable fellow’s downfall to reign in his stead over the place
beyond good and evil which is the goal of all the gods of men and the
reward of their meritorious exertions. I cannot forsake such a majestic
destiny in order to play with the droll and pretty figures that move
about in the depths of this mirror. And whether or not this is a mirror
which I may require hereafter, when I have come into my kingdom and have
resumed my exalted divine estate in my appropriate mythology, is a
matter which I shall settle in due time who have all eternity wherein to
do whatever I may prefer.”




                                  14.
                         Evarvan of the Mirror


THEN Gerald perceived that the wives of Glaum were not yet through
with their wonder-workings, for these seven women were now about a
ceremony which they called Asvamedha. They led into the temple a brown
horse. Before the mirror they struck down this horse with pole-axes. The
tail was cut off by the flaxen-haired wife in green, and the naked wife
carried it away, Gerald did not know whither. The horse’s head also was
severed from the body, by that wife who was with child; the head was
then adorned with a chaplet made of small loaves of bread. This head was
afterward impaled upon a stake and thus was set upright before the
mirror, but not facing it. Then the six wives of Glaum who yet remained
in the temple mixed the blood of the horse with the blood of unborn
calves; they turned the stake: and they showed Gerald what he must do.

When he had obeyed, and when they had all invoked Evarvan, then the
golden glowing of the sacred mirror was turned into a paler haze like
that of moonshine. Out of this silvery mistiness came a crowned woman.
She was clothed in white, and about her head shone an aureole.

And Gerald was enraptured. For this Evarvan of the Mirror was so
surpassingly lovely that she excelled all the other women his gaze had
ever beheld. Yet somehow it was not the coloring nor the placing of her
features that he was noting. Rather, he was observing himself and the
thing which was happening to this careful, this well-poised, fastidious,
parched, rather pitiable Gerald whom for so many years he had known. The
creature had not for a great while, not since, indeed, the days of his
first insanity about Evelyn, been visited by any real emotion: now,
momentarily at least, he was ablaze: he was caught perhaps: and it was
this imminent personal peril that Gerald was noting, aloofly, with a
drugged sense of derisory exultation.

For this Gerald, as it seemed to him, had known quite well, a great
while ago, before his lips had touched for pastime’s sake the lips of
any woman anywhere, that this woman who, it seemed, was called Evarvan,
existed in some place, and waited for him, and would by and by be found.
That very important fact, which a boy had known, a thriftless, very
silly young man had let slip out of mind. Throughout all the
twenty-eight years of his living, it seemed to Gerald, this Evarvan had
been the true and perfect love of his heart’s core.... To the extreme
romanticism of this phrase he conceded a smile: that he should have
concocted a phrase so abominable showed him just now to be neither
fastidious nor well poised.... Nevertheless, here was the woman whose
existence he, even in Lichfield, had always dimly divined, and of
whom—he had it now,—of whom Evelyn Townsend had been a parodying
shadow in human flesh. The likeness had been just sufficient to get him
into a great deal of trouble. He saw that likeness now, quite plainly.

“And this woman too is going to get me into trouble, I very much fear.
For all my being cries out to her. Eh, Gerald, one needs caution here,
my lad, you who find trouble uncongenial!”

Evarvan spoke. And she was speaking, oddly enough, as it seemed to him,
of that Evelyn who went about Lichfield immured in the body which was a
poor copy of Evarvan’s body. Yet Gerald was listening hardly at all. He
did not like the strong, insane and over-youthful emotions which this
woman roused in him. They endangered his welfare. For this woman was
awakening in him those old, unforgotten fervors which he had once felt
for Evelyn Townsend, and which had betrayed him into the horrid bondage
of an illicit love-affair. This Evarvan was ensnaring him, he knew, into
the insanities appropriate to youth and inexperience: and such nonsense
had to be controlled.

So it was half dazedly Gerald protested that—quite apart from the
claims of his divine duties as a Savior and a sun god, and apart too
from the obligations he was under to ascend the throne of Antan,—he
could no longer endure the stupidities and the fretfulness and the
jealousies of the Evelyn who had made adultery wholly unendurable.

“If she were but a bit like you, ma’am,” Gerald gallantly
remarked,—with somewhat increasing composure now that this woman
reminded him the more closely that he observed her yet more and more of
Evelyn,—“the case would be different.”

“But I,” said Evarvan of the Mirror, “will remain with you always, if
you indeed desire to become my lover. For there is a way, Gerald, there
is for you through my mirror’s aid an open way to contentment. You shall
know an untruth, and that untruth will make you free: the doings of the
world, and all the bustling that is made by merchants and by warriors
and by well-thought-of persons talking about important matters, will
then run by you like a little stream of shallow, bickering waters: and
you will heed none of these things, but only that loveliness which all
youth desires and no man ever finds save through my mirror’s aid. You
will live among bright shadows very futilely: yes: but you will be
happy.”

Gerald replied hoarsely: “I desire only you. I cannot think of thrones,
nor of any gods, now that you stand here within arm’s reach. All my
life-long I have desired you, as I know now, my dearest, throughout the
dreary while of over-much playing and laughter that I have lived in
ever-dwindling faith I would yet win to you by and by. But now I am
again as Johan Faustus,—or, rather, I am as Jurgen in that other old
story, when he had come at last to Helen, the delight of gods and men:
only I am more favored than was Jurgen, for my Helen speaks....”

“Oh, and I speak for your own good, my darling, for there is a condition
to be fulfilled before I may trust you and may give you all.”

Gerald answered: “No, Evelyn, not to-night—But indeed I entreat your
pardon, my dear. My mind must have been wandering. Yes, yes! as I was
saying, the difference is that Helen speaks!”

“For your own good, my dearest.”

“Yes; you speak, naturally, of a condition for my own good, just as
Glaum hinted that so many more or less friendly persons would be doing
in these parts.”

“I speak, though, of a very easy condition. You must yourself perform a
tiny Asvamedha; and you must immolate before my mirror, not any really
valuable horse, of course, nor even a good-looking horse, but only that
hideous and wholly worthless horse which you have brought with you into
the land of Dersam.”

Then Gerald said: “And that is a small price to pay for the attainment
of the one thing which my heart quite earnestly desires, is it not? For
all my life I have hungered, as I believe that all poets hunger, for
that unflawed beauty, seemingly not ever to be found upon this earth,
which now stands revealed in the form of a woman, and which now speaks
to me with the voice of a woman—oh, quite with the voice of a
woman!—and speaks, too, for my own good. Yes, it is a small price, such
as any boy of nineteen or thereabouts would pay gladly. For I must tell
you, who are the delight of gods and—well! of adolescent boys, at
least, in every quarter of the world,—that all this very strongly
reminds me of that first sonnet which I made about you when I was a boy
of nineteen.”

Evarvan did not wholly conceal her uneasiness over the prospect of
hearing this sonnet. But there was none the less in her voice a
tenderness almost motherly now that she asked of Gerald, “And did you
make verses, then, about me, dear, so early?”

“To prove it,” Gerald replied, “I will now recite to you that identical
sonnet.”

And he did.

But his voice was so shaken with emotion that, when he had completed the
octave, he paused, because it was never within Gerald’s power to resist
the beauty of a sublime thought when it was thus adequately expressed in
flawless verse. So for an instant he stayed silent. He caught up the
lovely hands of Evarvan of the Mirror, and he pressed them to his
trembling lips.

For this beguiling bright dream was now become a snare to delay him in
journeying onward to his appointed kingdom, and to betray him again into
bondage to the rather beautiful ideas and tinsel notions of youth.
Presently he would be seeing no more of this traitorous dream woman, who
was preparing to trust him and to give him all, and who none the less
was more lovely and more dear than any real thing anywhere. Afterward he
would regret her, he knew: always he would regret Evarvan, among
whatsoever delights they were which awaited Gerald in his appointed
kingdom. Nevertheless, this dream was an impediment in the way of a
Savior and a sun deity, with whose appropriate functions this dream was
interfering: and the most painful duty which confronted Gerald was not
precisely to be discourteous to a lady, but to discourage sacrilege.

Dismissing these cursory reflections, Gerald sighed: and he continued
the reciting of his sonnet with an air of lofty resignation intermingled
with a gustatory approval of really good verse.

“That,” said Evarvan of the Mirror, when he had ended, “is a very
beautiful sonnet, and I am proud to have inspired it. But we were
talking about something else, I have quite forgotten what—”

“I,” Gerald said, “have not forgotten.”

“Oh, yes, now I do remember! We were talking about the lucky chance
afforded you to get rid of that dreadful horse of yours.”

Gerald looked for one instant at the most lovely of all the illusions he
had found in the Mirror of Caer Omn. Then he began to recite the
multiplication tables.

You saw that she was frightened. She said, “Oh, and I trusted you! I
gave you all!”

She bleated now; her beauty was dimmed: and she seemed just the Evelyn
Townsend who had pestered Gerald beyond any reasonable endurance.

But Gerald, howsoever heavy was the heart of Gerald who quite honestly
objected to being troubled by anything, went on inexorably to exorcise
Evarvan with the old runes of common-sense. He spoke of the elephant
that is the largest of beasts, and of the very dissimilar household
economy practised by a King of Israel and by Elijah the Tishbite, and of
the straight line that is the shortest distance between two points; and
the old magic was potent.

Before his eyes Evarvan of the Mirror was changed. Of the degradation
which was put upon her, it suffices to report that this lovely lady went
backward in the course of every mortal woman’s living. She passed from
girlhood into a lank-legged childhood, and thence into drooling and
feebly puking infancy, and after that into the shapes she had worn in
her mother’s womb. In the end there remained of the most dear illusion
which Gerald had found in the Mirror of Caer Omn only two pink figures
in the form of a soft throbbing egg and of a creature like a tadpole
darting lustfully about it: and these melted back into the moonshine of
the Sacred Mirror of Caer Omn.

Nor was that all. The wives of Glaum and the Temple of the Mirror and
all that was about Gerald began to waver. All the material things about
him showed now like paintings on a gauze curtain which was moving and
crinkling in a very gentle breeze. The shaping of the six wives became
longer and more attenuated: they were shaped like the shadows of women
in a fine sunset. These so prettily tinted shadows strained toward the
mirror and entered it precisely as you may see smoke drift toward and
out of an opened window. Then all the temple followed them collapsingly,
as if colored waters were running into a hole. The mirror swallowed all.
Caer Omn was gone: the land of Dersam was a ruined land without
inhabitants. Afterward the pale glass blinked seven times like summer
lightning, and the mirror was not there.

Gerald stood alone in a cedar-shadowed way. He was weeping quite
unaffectedly. His very deepest poetic sensibilities had been touched by
the rather beautiful idea that he had loved this woman all his
life-long, and that now he had lost her forever: but a little way behind
Gerald the silver stallion stayed unimmolated, and grazed placidly.




                               PART FIVE
                          THE BOOK OF LYTREIA

                    “Whether You Boil or Roast Snow,
                    You Can Have but Water of It.”




                                  15.
                            At Tenjo’s Court


GERALD passed on, riding upon the stallion Kalki, down a valley of
cedar-trees, into the realm of Tenjo of the Long Nose. This was the land
of Lytreia, they told him. But, here too, dejection overbrooded all, and
the atmosphere was elegiac, for people everywhere were lamenting that
vigor and resiliency and liveliness had gone out of their noses, so that
no man in Lytreia was able to sneeze or to employ his nose in any other
normal way.

“Well, now, suppose you take me to this king of yours,” said Gerald,
“for it may be I can re-awaken hereabouts all the lost joys of
influenza.”

“And who shall we say to him has come into Lytreia, red-headed and
riding upon the back of this huge and sparkling horse with the splendid
nose?”

“You will say to your king that this land is honored by a visit from
Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth,
the Well-beloved of Heavenly Ones, as he passes toward his appointed
kingdom in Antan, riding in very terrible estate upon the back of his
famous silver stallion Kalki, a beast which, strictly speaking, has no
nose, but only nostrils at the tip of his long, noble head.”

They also seemed unimpressed. “No god is of terrible estate except the
Holy Nose of Lytreia; nor do we concede the existence of any kingdom not
his. Nevertheless, you may come with us.”

“Upon my word,” thought Gerald, “but in these parts the people pay very
inadequate homage to us gods and are little better than heretics.”

But he went with these over-sceptical persons quietly to their King
Tenjo.

And Tenjo received the Well-beloved of Heavenly Ones more affably.
First, though, the grave, white-bearded King shared with the visiting
god a quite excellent dinner, which was handsomely served to them by ten
pages in ermine and a seneschal in vermilion silk: not until dinner was
over, and the two sat drinking their spiced wine out of gold goblets,
would the King talk about his troubles. Then Tenjo complained that his
nose was fallen and flabby. It was no longer worshipful. That was in all
ways deplorable, said the King, refilling his goblet, inasmuch as his
people worshipped a nose, and could respect no male creature who had not
a large and high-standing and robust and succulent nose.

Gerald was a little puzzled, because this seemed to him a queer sort of
calamity to be befalling anybody, unless it was caused by the magic of
the wu. But Gerald made no comment. He asked only how this sad state of
affairs had come about.

He was told that all the youth and vigor had been taken out of the Holy
Nose of Lytreia, and out of Tenjo’s nose, and out of the nose of every
man in the kingdom, by the blighting magic of a sorceress who had lately
established her residence in the tomb of King Peter the Builder.

“It is there,” said Tenjo, “the veiled Mirror of the Two Truths is
hidden: but not even of that does this sorceress seem afraid.”

“Nor, for that matter, am I: for I am Lord of the Third Truth. Well, it
is fairly evident this woman is a wu.”

“You may be right. I confess that dreadful possibility had not ever
occurred to me—”

“Only we gods are omniscient, my dear Tenjo,” said Gerald, kindlily. “So
there is no need for any mere king to be ashamed of his human
blindness.”

“—Because, as I must tell you, before this minute I had not ever heard
of a wu.”

“You have been lucky. The less one hears of such creatures, the better
for everybody. So, how is this woman called?”

“She is called Evaine,” said Tenjo; “and she is called also the Lady of
Peter’s Tomb, now that she has taken possession of it.”

Then Gerald finished his fourth goblet, and Gerald hiccoughed, and
Gerald said: “Your case, my dear fellow, while perplexing, is not wholly
desperate. For I bring youth with me, and I will renovate your withered
noses. I am competent to deal with any wu. I give you, in fact, my
divine word that you shall be rid of this wu. Yes, Lytreia shall be rid
of her, even though it is necessary that to undo her hoodoo I do with
due to-do woo the wu, too—”

“Would you be so kind,” said Tenjo, looking troubled, “as to repeat
that, rather more slowly?”

Gerald obliged him, and continued: “Yes, I assure you, upon the most
sacred oath of our Dirghic heaven,—known only to the gods, my dear
fellow, so that you will, I trust, pardon my not repeating it,—that I
will subject this wu and this mirror also to my divine inspection—”

“Ah, but I must tell you,” said Tenjo, seeming yet more troubled, “that
the man who looks into that mirror straightway finds himself transformed
into two stones. For that reason it is hidden away in Peter’s Tomb, and
it is kept veiled, and of course no man has ever dared go near it.”

“How, then, did this mirror ever manage to change anybody into two
stones if nobody ever dared go near it?”

“Why, but the mirror was compelled to change them into two stones
because that was the law. It was not at all the mirror’s fault. Surely,
you who are a god and are omniscient, and who are now nearly drunk
enough to see everything double, can see that much?”

“So far as your explanation goes, I can see the mirror’s blamelessness
in the face of an obdurate physical law. Nor does any god object to a
physical law which concerns other people.”

“And they kept away from the mirror because they knew about this law.
Surely, that too was natural?”

“In a way, yes. But how could they be certain about this law?”

“How could they help it, how could anybody be ignorant of one of our
very oldest and most famous laws, which comes down to us, indeed, from
sources so august and venerable that they antedate all history?”

“Why, then, who enacted this law?”

“How should I know, when, as I was just telling you, this law is older
than any recorded history?”

“But in a thousand pounds of law there is not an ounce of pleasure, and
there are entirely too many laws,” said Gerald, shaking his red head
above his golden goblet rather despondently. “There is common,
statutory, international, maritime, ecclesiastical, and martial law.
There is the law of averages, the Salic law, and Grimm’s law of the
permutations of consonants. There is Jewish sacred law; there is prize
law; there is the law of gravity; there is John Law, who first developed
the natural wealth of the Mississippi, and William Law, who was a great
mystic. There are, in logic, the laws of thought, just as in astronomy
and physics and political economy there are, severally, the well-known
laws of Kepler and Prevost and Gresham. In fine, there are laws
everywhere, and they are very often a nuisance. He that goes to law
loses time and money and rest and friends. Law is a lottery, law is a
bottomless pit, law is an ass which slaps his tail in every man’s face.
So it very well may be, my dear fellow, that in a world so legally
overstocked this law of yours is superfluous, and therefore wrong.”

But Tenjo was not convinced by Gerald’s relentless logic. Tenjo said
only:

“I do not any more know what you are talking about than you do. But I do
know that”—here Tenjo hiccoughed, with judicial graveness,—“that it
does not alter the principle of the thing. So this mirror will continue
to transform into two stones all men who look into it, although I cannot
see how it matters the worth of one box of matches in hell, because so
long as the law is such, no man will ever look into this mirror.”

“Yet, do you but answer me this very simple question! What if some
intelligent, unsuperstitious person were to look into this mirror,—and
were to come back not changed into stone, and not hurt in any
way,—would that not prove to you the insanity of this law?”

“Of course it would not! That would only prove the man was a liar. The
plain fact of his not being changed into two stones would be legal proof
in any of our courts or in any law-respecting place anywhere that he had
not ever looked into the Mirror of the Two Truths.”

“Oh, very well!” said Gerald. “No, thank you, my dear fellow, not
another drop! Let us go to the temple! And let us each lean upon the
other’s arm, for your most excellent wine does not seem to have
clarified anything exactly.”




                                  16.
                        The Holy Nose of Lytreia


NOW, when the grave, white-bearded King and the red-headed god had
come to the Temple of the Holy Nose, they entered it arm in arm,
followed by the King’s court. And when they approached the adytum, the
head priestess came toward them exhibiting a cteis, or large copper
comb, which she offered to Tenjo. The King accepted it, he parted her
hair in the middle, and he spoke the Word of Entry.

Said Tenjo: “I enter, proud and erect. I take my fill of delight
imperiously, irrationally, and none punishes.”

The head priestess replied, “Not yet.”

Tenjo said then, “But in three months, and in three months, and in three
more months, the avenger comes forth, and mocks me by being as I am, and
by being foredoomed to do as I have done, inevitably.”

This ceremony being discharged, they all entered the adytum, and then
the three priestesses led Gerald toward the collapsed and shrivelled
idol which was in the adytum. And Gerald whistled.

“—For do you call this,” said Gerald, “a nose?”

“Sir,” replied the priestesses, “we do. As, likewise, do all other
well-conducted persons.”

“Yet, I would call it,” said Gerald, whose naturally fine color was now
perceptibly heightened by Tenjo’s excellent wine, “another member.”

“Such, sir,” they answered him, “is not our custom.”

“Nevertheless,” said Gerald, waggling very gravely his red head,
“nevertheless, it is written in the scriptures of the Protestant
Episcopal church that, even as great ships are turned about in the sea’s
roaring main with a very small helm, even so is every man guided in the
main by a small member—”

They said, “Yet, sir—”

“And this member is not well spoken of by the Apostolic Fathers. This
member has ruined virgins: its conquests are stained with blood: it has
caused the widow to regret: it has deceived the wisest and most elderly
of men. It is, in fine, a member whose blushing hue is wholly proper to
its iniquitous history.”

They replied, “Still, sir—”

“It is an over proud and wild member. Most justly is it written that
every kind of beasts and of birds and of serpents and of things in the
sea is to be tamed, and has been tamed, by human kind; but that this
member can no man tame; for it is an unruly member, seeking ruthlessly
its prey; a rebellious member, prominent in uprisings; a member very
often full of deadly poison.”

They said, “None the less, sir—”

“I deduce that this member here represented is not worshipful. I deduce
that it is not well for you of Lytreia to worship this shrivelled image
of a tongue, for all that you call it a nose.”

“But, sir, while there is much piousness and erudition in what you say,
you must understand that the word ‘nose’ is a word with connotations and
with a reputed correspondence in anatomy—”

“I do not at all understand that saying, and so I cannot quite see your
point of view. I merely know that, in consonance with the words of St.
James the Just, and according to the scriptures of the Protestant
Episcopal church, this member is a tongue. And I admit that this tongue,
which your heathenish upbringing induces you to call a nose, is in a
peculiarly bad way. But the divine word of Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper
and Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, has been pledged to help and
to preserve this idol. So we will see what can be done about it.”

Then Gerald moistened his finger-tip with a drop of the water from the
Churning of the Ocean. As the Lady of the First Water-Gap had done to
Gerald’s forehead, so Gerald did to the shrivelled idol of Lytreia.

It was changed. Its limpness departed; its coloring quickened; corded
large blue veins, very intricately forked and branched, arose about its
now glowing surface, which revealed also many tiny veins that were
brightly red and astonishingly tortuous. It became enormous and
high-standing and robust and succulent. It throbbed and jerked. It was
hot to the touch: and the roughened cartilage of its erect tip-end now
glistened with imperial purple.

And everywhere at that same instant the magic of Evaine was lifted from
Lytreia, and the nose of every man regained its proper proportions and
vigor. Young couples to the right hand and to the left could be seen
withdrawing to sneeze in private: the girls were already producing their
handkerchiefs. And the three priestesses began to bathe the rejuvenated
idol with refreshing water: they wreathed it with leaves of the Indian
wood-apple; they placed before it flowers and incense and sweetmeats.
Meanwhile they chaunted a contented song in honor of the Holy Nose.

Tenjo and all the older lords and dowagers of Tenjo’s court had kneeled
in worship. Gerald only remained standing as arrogantly erect as was the
idol which people worshipped in Lytreia.

“I honor in a civil way,” said Gerald, “the spirit of this tongue—”

“But this,” said Tenjo the King, now speaking almost peevishly, “is not
a tongue. It is the Holy Nose of Lytreia.”

“Do you not be flying, my dear fellow, upon the wings of bad temper,
into the face of scripture and of logic! In a civil way, I repeat, I
honor this member. I personally am rather fond of talking. Nevertheless,
as being myself a member of the Protestant Episcopal church, and as
being also a self-respecting member of the Dirghic mythology, I must
decline to worship this so restive and inflammable member of any man’s
body.”

Tenjo at that got up from off his knees. He came toward Gerald: and the
white-bearded, grave King then spoke with rather less of peevishness
than of compassion.

“You will regret such sayings. For that also is a law of Lytreia.
However, do you now ask what you will for the vigor which you have
restored to our noses, and we will gladly pay that price. Yet for the
blasphemies which you have uttered in this temple the spirit of the Holy
Nose will by and by be asking a price: and that price nor you nor any
other lad will ever pay gladly.”

Gerald replied, “For the renovation of your noses, and as a propitiatory
trap for the doomed wu in Peter’s Tomb, you will pay me the price of one
black rooster.”

“But what,” asked Tenjo, “is a rooster?”

“Why, a rooster is the herald of the dawn, it is the father of an
omelet, it is the pullet’s first bit of real luck, it is the male of the
_Gallus domesticus_.”

“We do not call a male chicken that—”

“No,” Gerald assented, “no, but you ought to. And not to do so is wholly
un-American.”

“Yet why do you Americans call this particular bird a rooster, when
everybody knows that all birds except ostriches and cassowaries roost,
and that every flying bird everywhere is thus a rooster?”

“Well, I admit that we do not reason about it as you reason in Lytreia.
I admit that the word ‘rooster’ is a word without connotations and
without any correspondence in anatomy. Nevertheless, every nation has
its customs. And it is as much our well-established American custom to
call the male of the chicken a rooster as it is your custom to call that
thing a nose.”

“But we call that a nose because it is, in point of fact, a nose. It is,
as we have told you I do not know how many times, the Holy Nose of
Lytreia.”

Gerald was honestly exasperated by the obstinacy of the people of this
kingdom.

“Even so,” said he, “if you want the truth—”

He spoke then the truth about that tongue, as it appeared to him. But
his remarks were lost to history through the circumstance that none of
his hearers ever thought of setting them down in writing.

Instead, his hearers shuddered. They gave him a black cock, and they
drove him out of that temple. It was in this way that Gerald put an
affront upon the Holy Nose of Lytreia.




                                  17.
                         Evaine of Peter’s Tomb


NOW Gerald rode upon the silver stallion toward the immemorial,
moss-overgrown tomb of King Peter the Builder, and Gerald carried under
his left arm the black cock. Gerald noted, with an interest natural to
any student of magic, the glorification tree which grew beside this
tomb. He once more whistled meditatively. Then he hitched his shining
stallion to an over-candidly carved and painted post which stood at the
door of the tomb, and he went in.

The interior of this spacious tomb was lighted with nineteen iron lamps
swung from the ceiling. Gerald thus saw, first of all, the great
four-square mirror covered with a flesh-colored cloth. Before it fumed a
smoking brazier; and beside this stood the appearance of a woman. To her
left hand was a broad bed, and to her right, a gilded pig-trough heaped
with fig-leaves. These leaves this woman was crumpling and tearing into
little pieces one by one before she destroyed them in the fire of the
brazier.

She heard Gerald’s civil cough. She turned: and Gerald was enraptured.

For Evaine of Peter’s Tomb was so surpassingly lovely that she excelled
all the other women his gaze had ever beheld. The colors of this
beautiful young girl’s two eyes were nicely matched, and her nose stood
just equidistant between them. Beneath this was her mouth, and she had
also a pair of ears. The girl was young, she exhibited no deformity
anywhere, and the enamored glance of the young man could perceive in her
no fault. There was, to be sure, a puzzling likeness to somebody he had
once known, but Gerald’s quick wits soon unriddled the mystery. This
woman reminded him of Evelyn Townsend.

Nor was this all. He observed now that this woman was, just as he had
suspected, a Fox-Spirit, for now from Evaine of Peter’s Tomb emanated
the power of her magic. That magic which overmasters all animals now
smote at Gerald; and in a mildly amusing way he found its assaults
really quite interesting.

“For this is the goety of beasts,” he reflected. “This is the brutish
half-magic of the wu which maddens men, along with all other animals in
their rutting season, and robs them of self-control. This magic
persuades me, almost, that I, too, am only a bundle of cellular matter
upon its way to becoming manure. Yes, my life, too, at just this moment,
seems but a grudged brief season of bewildered appetites and of baffled
surmise such as is the life of a mortal man. I, too, seem a mere human
being passing from the forgotten to the unforeseeable. Under the
assaults of this small carnal magic, I seem again to go in that
continuous masked loneliness which mortal persons in Lichfield and
elsewhere call living. I long to put out of mind the frailness and the
transiency of my hold upon living. The nonsensical notion has occurred
to me that such forgetfulness may be hired by bringing the epidermis
which masks me into superficial contact with the homogenous animal
matter in which hides this Fox-Spirit.... Yes, I am being, as it were,
maddened with desire; I am very rapidly becoming the prey of this
Fox-Spirit’s irresistible powers of fascination, so to speak. And I find
it really quite interesting to observe how this half-magic which
destroys so many men now impiously strikes beyond its proper arena, at
that which is divine; and how this foolish magic attempts to deceive
even me, who am a Savior and a sun god.”

Such were the cursory reflections which passed through Gerald’s mind in
the while that he said, aloud, “Good-evening, ma’am!”

The Fox-Spirit Evaine, without replying to him directly, took out of her
bosom a white gem about the size of an orange. She tossed this up into
the air, and caught it again. Gerald conjectured that this was her soul,
but he made no comment.

He displayed to her his cock, saying, as was needful, “I entreat you to
accept my rooster—”

“But what,” asked learned Evaine, “what did you call this tamed
descendant of the wild Bankiva fowl,—whose original habitat was in
Northern India from Sindh to Burma, and in Cochin China, and in many of
the Malay Islands as far as Timor, and in the Philippines?”

“Why, in the United States of America, ma’am, we, rather more briefly,
and for a variety of reasons, call this bird a rooster.”

“It has been well observed,” she replied, “by Pliny the Elder—a
celebrated Roman naturalist, born 23 A.D., perished in the eruption of
Vesuvius 79 A.D.,—that every nation has its customs.”

Then the Fox-Spirit dexterously cut off the head of Gerald’s cock with
the sacrificial ax, and turning toward the East, she spoke the needed
words three times. One entered now in a scarlet coat, a yellow vest, and
pale green knee-breeches. His head was like that of a mastiff, with the
addition of two horns and the ears of an ass, but he had the legs and
hoofs of a calf. Such was he who carried off the black cock which Gerald
had brought for the Fox-Spirit’s master, as a propitiatory offering and
a trap.

Gerald smiled. Gerald shook hands, politely, with Evaine the learned
Fox-Spirit.

“I am,” said Gerald, “a god.”

She replied: “I am one who serves all gods. I honor every tribe of those
divine beings whose existence scholars have so variously accounted for
as the products of physical and ethical and historical and etymological
blunders abetted by homonymy and polonymy. But I require for my piety a
honorarium.”

“And what is that honorarium?”

She told him.

And as she spoke, Evaine drew near to him, and yet nearer, and she was
remarkably desirable. If only she had not now reminded Gerald more and
more of Evelyn Townsend, she would have been resistless.

“Very well, then!” said Gerald, affably: “you shall have that honorarium
to-morrow morning if you still care to demand a reward so trivial.”

Immediately afterward he said, “But, indeed, ma’am, you quite
misunderstand me!”

Then with a few well-chosen words he placed their relationship upon a
more decorous basis.

And Evaine the Fox-Spirit laughed. Such unresponsiveness she declared to
be, when manifested by a god, wholly surprising, and comparable to the
Seven Wonders of the World, namely: (1) the Pyramids of Egypt; (2) the
Hanging Gardens of Babylon; (3) the Tomb of Mausolos; (4) the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus; (5) the Colossus of Rhodes; (6) the Statue of Zeus by
Phidias; and (7) the Pharos at Alexandria. Yet, Evaine continued, she
perceived that she might trust him—

“You may do nothing of the sort!” said Gerald, decisively. “You may not
even give me all. No, ma’am, it would be quite unadvisable, because, as
I am forced to point out, you in your unfading youth and omniscient
learning are many thousands of years older than I am in my present
incarnation. Beside you, I am a mere boy. Now, it is often a great
disadvantage to a boy, it is by and by a curse to him, to succumb to the
loving confidence and generosity of a woman much older than himself. It
is unwholesome. It is un-American.”

“Is it, then, inconsistent with the manners of a continent in the
Western Hemisphere—first named America by Waldseemüller, a teacher of
geography in the college of Saint-Dié among the Vosges, in a treatise
called _Cosmographia_, published in 1507,—for me to like you so much
that I just want to touch you and be near you?”

“No, ma’am, that, I regret to say, is universal. Besides, I did not
particularly mean you. I only mean that there are such women, as we both
know, dear lady, who prey upon young boys. They employ for this purpose
all their confidence and generosity without the least scruple. And many
a hard, bitter, cynical man has originally had his faith in and his
regard for everything good and holy blasted in his very first boyhood by
the confiding nature and generosity of some middle-aged woman or another
and her subsequent references to the advantage he took of her.”

“It is possible that you speak with the clearness recommended by
Quintilian as the chief virtue of speech,—born in Spain about 25 A.D.,
died about 95 A.D., patronized by Vespasian and Domitian,—but it is
certain that I do not understand one word of your speaking.”

“—However,” Gerald continued, “when a boy has a nice, clean friendship
with an older woman it is one of the most valuable and helpful
experiences that can come into his life. A friendship such as this
appears to me a rather beautiful idea. The older woman—particularly
when she is older by many thousands of years,—can teach him, as his
mother out of the superficial knowledge of a callow half-century or so
cannot possibly do, about women. She can inspire and direct him. She can
fire his ambition. She can encourage him. She can be to him in every way
a liberal education.”

“Now, certainly, I shall never understand your American way of uttering
so many platitudes—derived from the Greek word _platys_, meaning
‘flat,’—when I was attempting to do all these things!”

“Ah, but we must keep the education entirely oral, and we must keep,
too, your little hands—So, now, that is very much better!”

“It is better still to permit a wilful person to have his way,—a remark
attributed to Periander, an ancient sage, and Tyrant of Corinth during
the sixth century B.C.,—since you elect to give me my honorarium for
nothing,” Evaine said, rather sulkily.

Gerald elected to do nothing of the sort. But, since his real intentions
would have been an awkward matter to explain, he kept silent about them.

After that Gerald questioned the learned Fox-Spirit. She explained to
him willingly enough the laws of Lytreia and described the basket they
were found in, and she made it plain just how these laws were enforced
by a committee of midwives and stonemasons. She spoke of the magic she
had put upon Lytreia. She spoke of Tenjo, telling how in the prime of
his youth he came to be called Tenjo of the Long Nose; and her
statistics were remarkable. She talked then about the wind between the
stars, and about the grandeur that was Greece, and about Hobson’s
choice, and about Davey Jones’s locker, and about the cause of
volcanoes, and about the curate’s egg, and about the best cures for
baldness. For no information anywhere was hidden from the wisdom of
Evaine, who knew all things, and who served all gods.

“I perceive,” said Gerald, “that you have knowledge, and I like your
reflections extremely. So do you speak yet further out of the stores of
your omniscience!”

He had been glancing all the while toward the veiled Mirror of the Two
Truths. But he of course said never a word about this mirror. His
present task was simply to lure on this cultured and malefic creature to
her complete ruin.

For the Fox-Spirit, as Gerald saw, was still about the brutish magic of
the wu, which drives men mad, and she now spoke of more and yet more
evil matters such as were very well adapted to incite Gerald to
brutality. She spoke of the battle of life, and of the feast of reason,
and of the irony of fate, and of the lap of luxury. She talked of the
writing on the wall, and of the scroll of fame, and of the lexicon of
youth, and of the cloud that had a silver lining. She touched upon the
two seas, of troubles and of upturned faces. She discussed the durance
that was vile, and the hours that were wee and sma’, and the
consummation that was devoutly to be wished for, and the light that was
dim and religious, and the heat which was not the humidity. She
indicated the balm in Gilead, the place in the sun, and the safety in
numbers. She afterward gave succinctly the recipes for making a mountain
out of a molehill, a silk purse out of a sow’s ear, and a virtue out of
a necessity. For no evil phrase of any sort was hidden from the wisdom
of Evaine, who knew all things, and who served all gods, and who was now
intent to exercise upon Gerald the magic of the wu, which drives men
mad.

But Gerald only smiled, almost approvingly. This woman was reminding him
more and more of Evelyn Townsend, and his pulses had not ever been
calmer.

“I perceive,” said Gerald, “that you have a great deal of knowledge,
with the vocabulary of a dear friend to back it devastatingly.
Therefore, ma’am, to avail myself of your knowledge alone may serve my
divine ends much better than your really most flattering proffers in
other fields.”

For now it was Gerald’s turn to speak. So now he revealed to the baffled
Fox-Spirit the fact that he was Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and
Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved of Heavenly
Ones, a very potent god who had temporarily mislaid his mythology. He
told the omniscient Fox-Spirit, who knew all things excepting only how
and at what hour her knowledge would end, of Gerald’s adventures during
the rather crowded twenty-four hours since he had left Lichfield.

And now she was smiling over his obtuseness. For to all-wise Evaine it
was at once apparent that Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and Preserver, the
Lord of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved of Heavenly Ones, was a
culture hero like Quat or Quetzalcoatl or Cagn or Osiris or Dionysos.
All these were former acquaintances of hers: she knew, she said, every
inch of them, for each one of these had stopped to visit her who served
all gods, as each had passed downward toward Antan. Evaine, if anybody,
would thus know a culture hero wherever she saw a culture hero.

Every mythology contained one of these glorious philanthropists, born of
a mysterious and superior race, just as Gerald had been born in the
United States of America, a philanthropist, as the learned Fox-Spirit
said, very usually theriomorphic, who came in the appearance of a
jackass or of some other animal among less favored peoples to teach them
strange new arts and mysteries, and to endow them with every kind of
cultural advantage and prosperity, just as Gerald had benefited the
people of Dersam and of Lytreia, and was preparing to benefit Antan.

She pointed out, furthermore, that a culture hero was in no way
un-American. There had been, for example, Quetzalcoatl. She also
remembered quite clearly Yetl,—because a deity in the form of a bird
was always, she said, rather difficult,—and Poshaiyankya, and Coyote,
and Esaugetuh, and that other waggish Indian deity—his name at present
evaded her,—who had traveled incognito in the shape of a large spider.
For all these aboriginal American culture heroes had visited Evaine as
they passed downward toward Antan, and every one of them had been in a
somewhat earlier generation Gerald’s fellow countryman.

“In the light of your forceful logic, ma’am, I concede that, over and
above being a Savior and a sun god, it seems probable I must be a
culture hero too.”

“But yet, in any case,—dear, unresponsive, frigid child,” said the
Fox-Spirit, speaking far more simply than she had done before,—“do you
not know that all mythologies are controlled by the Master Philologist,
so that he alone may say in which one of them and in what capacity you
belong?”

“I find that saying obscure.”

“It means only that sooner or later all gods save only Koleos Koleros
and the upright spirit of the Holy Nose pass down into Antan.”

“Yes, for, as they told me at Caer Omn, Antan is the heaven of all
deserving gods, where they rest from their divine labors.”

But the Fox-Spirit shook her head, rather forebodingly. “I, certainly,
would not say that.”

“Do you, then, but answer me this very simple question! What becomes of
them there? what fate befalls in that place all which men have found
most beautiful and most worshipful?”

“How can one say, when no god has ever returned? It is known only that,
in one way or another way, the Master Philologist disposes of every
deity that men have served, save only the two supreme gods of all
mammals,—a class of vertebrates embracing bats, the warm-blooded
quadrupeds, seals, cetaceans, man, and sirenians.”

Gerald drew a long face. “Your account of the matter, ma’am, suggests
that my predecessor upon the throne of Antan lacks piety. You imply that
the creature is deficient in true religious feeling. That is a fault I
would have to requite when I take from him his throne and all the great
and best words of magic.”

“To do that, child, needs power such as has not been shown by any god
among the many millions of gods that men have worshipped since the first
infancy of Chronos,—a Greek personification of Time, usually depicted
as carrying a sickle and an hourglass.”

“Ah, but, my dear lady, I, who am at once a culture hero and a sun deity
and a Savior, must be a peculiarly powerful god. And, besides, ma’am,
from what you tell me—Why, but, really now, it appears probable that
the Master Philologist has damaged the Dirghic mythology to which I
myself belong! No god can patiently endure such usage; and my divine
wrath will, thus, redouble my power.”

“But, still,—but, still, you dear, nice-looking and vainglorious
baby—!”

Evaine had paused. She was regarding him almost compassionately: and
Gerald felt he could never get used to the flighty way in which people
everywhere in the Marches of Antan seemed to pity the high gods. It was
a quite friendly way they had of looking at you, but to extend
commiseration where reverence was the proper thing savored almost of
irreligion.

Gerald shrugged. He said:

“I shall therefore be resistless. I shall compel him to restore into
general circulation the Dirghic mythology, after having amply repaired
whatsoever damage he may have done to it, and then I shall assume, in
addition to his throne, my proper station as a culture hero and a sun
deity and a Savior in that mythology. So the affair is, virtually,
settled: we may now turn to other matters: and in return for the
gracious aid afforded by your large wisdom, I will make in your honor a
sonnet.”

“It is a very beautiful sonnet,—consisting of fourteen decasyllabic
lines, expressing two phases of a single thought or sentiment,” said
Evaine the Fox-Spirit,—“and I am proud to have inspired it.”

“You forget,” said Gerald, “that I have not yet recited my sonnet. I
will now do so.”

And he did.

But his voice was so shaken with emotion that, when he had completed the
octave, he paused, because it was never within Gerald’s power to resist
the beauty of a sublime thought when it was thus adequately expressed in
flawless verse. So for an instant he stayed silent.

He caught up the lovely hands of Evaine the Fox-Spirit, and as he
pressed them to his trembling lips he noted that these hands smelled
like hops drying in the sun. It seemed to him exceedingly pitiful he had
given that promise to Tenjo. It seemed to him there was a certain
sameness in the dear women who made colorful the Marches of Antan, and,
to some extent, a similarity in their more intimate love passages with
Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and Preserver. He found it depressing to
reflect that destruction waited, so very near, for so much loveliness.
He found it perfectly dreadful to foreknow that he would often regret
this omniscient Evaine and her fine stores of useful information, once
he had kept the divine word given to Tenjo, and had put an end to her
living before she could do any further damage to the men of Lytreia.

Gods ought to abstain from all love-affairs: for through love alone
might a god look to be wounded,—upon rainy Sunday afternoons, perhaps,
or after drinking a bit more than was good for one,—to be wounded, at
such unavoidable seasons of low vitality, with recurrent, plaguing
memories of his mortal playthings, so dear, so very dear, and so soon
reft away from his immortal arms, irrevocably....

After these cursory reflections, Gerald sighed, and—with the thoughtful
commentary that, since this was a Miltonic sonnet, his poem here went on
with the same sentence,—he continued his reciting.

And when he had ended, the Fox-Spirit sighed contentedly. She spoke with
acumen and authority as to the main events of Milton’s life and as to
his principal works, and she added:

“That is a very beautiful sonnet,—a verse form of Italian origin, first
used in English by Sir Thomas Wyatt in 1557,—and I am proud to have
inspired it. That is the sort of poetry which would incline any living
woman to trust you and to give you all the very moment you stopped
reciting it. So now will you not come to bed?”

“No, Evelyn, not to-night—I beg your pardon, ma’am! My thoughts were
wool-gathering. What I had meant to say was but that if you insist upon
yet further displays of your great-hearted womanly confidence and
generosity you shall be walloped with a broomstick—severely. No, do you
retire now, my dear lady, by all means, and with my apologies for
keeping you up so late because of the delight I have got from your
instructive way of talking. But I shall pass the remainder of the night
in the aloofness appropriate to a god, in this quite comfortable
armchair.”

And this he did.




                                  18.
                             End of a Vixen


WHEN Evaine was asleep, though, then Gerald rose softly from his
chair. He approached the bed. Very carefully he inserted his hand
between the young breasts of Evaine, and lightly he drew out the strange
white gem. He waited now, looking down compassionately at this really
very lovely girl....

But at his touch the learned Fox-Spirit had moved, so that she now lay
flat upon her back, with her mouth a little open. Evelyn slept thus. And
that was why Evelyn snored....

Gerald shrugged. He took up the sacrificial ax.

Now that the dawn was at hand, he went out from the tomb, to the
glorification tree, and he began to fell the tree with this ax. At the
first stroke blood gushed out of the gray bark copiously, and Gerald
heard a wailing noise. Gerald looked upward. The appearance of a young
child dressed in blue garments was to be seen in a cleft in the side of
the tree. It had the seeming of a boy child about seven or eight years
old, a freckled boy, with tousled red hair, and with as yet only one
upper front tooth.

This child wailed broken-heartedly: “A blasphemer is come up against the
Two Truths; a vainglorious fool derides the pair that endure where all
else perishes; and life is denied to me by his wrongheadedness.”

Gerald had put down the ax. He was trembling. He did not like the love
and the great yearning which had awakened in his heart. He folded his
arms very tightly: he seemed tense and rather frightened looking as he
waited there peering sidewise toward this boy.

“Child,” Gerald said, “what is your will that you cry out for life from
the glorification tree?”

“My father, I demand the life which you have not given me, that life
which you owe to me, and that life which is denied me so long as you
deny the Two Truths.”

“I serve the demands of my appointed kingdom, child. I serve the needs
of no other truth and the needs of no pawing women who would keep me out
of that kingdom.”

“My father, your kingdom is a doubtful dream, but the flesh of my mother
is real.”

“My dream is lovelier than any woman. Oh, and a doubtfulness also is
more lovely than the body of a woman, for I know the shaping of that
body over-well.”

“My father, you refuse the pleasures which will not ever be returning.”

“I am a god. I serve the needs of my own will.”

“The gods also pass, my father, they also pass without any returning,
upon the road which you now tread.”

“Let us pass, then, unhindered! But no woman permits it.”

“That is because these women, O my father, have a very rational wisdom.”

“Such is, perhaps, the case. But a god has his irrational dream. And
that is better.”

“It is well enough, my father, for that dream to end contentedly in the
arms of some woman.”

“It is well enough. It is customary. But I am Fair-haired Hoo, the
Helper and the Preserver. I go to my appointed kingdom: and I am Lord of
a Third Truth, whose mightiness I must help and preserve.”

Then Gerald hewed on: and as the tree fell, the child vanished.

Now Gerald set fire to the tree: and when a tidy blaze was crackling, he
spoke the needed words, and into the heart of this fire he tossed the
strange white gem. Straightway you heard a loud screeching. Out of the
tomb of Peter the Builder came a vixen fox, screaming and shuddering
quite horribly, but not ever ceasing to approach the fire. She entered
the flames. Silence followed, and the dawn of a superb May morning which
was marred only by an unpleasant odor of singed hair and burning flesh.

Gerald after that went back into the tomb from which the omniscient
Fox-Spirit had been dispossessed. He looked rather sentimentally upon
the empty disordered bed: then he passed beyond the brazier, in which
the ruins of fig-leaves yet smouldered, toward the Mirror of the Two
Truths.

The fact no longer mattered, perhaps, that any man who looked into this
mirror straightway found himself transformed into two stones: but it
very greatly mattered what effect this mirror would have upon a sun god
and a Savior and a culture hero. So he removed the flesh-colored veil.




                                  19.
                            Beyond the Veil


BUT he was not turned into two stones. Nor was there confronting him
any mirror. Beyond the flesh-colored veil he found only an ancient
painting very carefully done, but upon an unhuman scale which made this
painting monstrous. The subject of the picture, however, is not known,
because Gerald never told anybody.

But it is known that Gerald shook his head at this painting.

“Laborious daub of prevaricating pigment!” he remarked. “O futile
painting, which so many foolish believers in Lytreia think to be the
Mirror of the Two Truths! I question your arithmetic. For I myself am
the Lord of a Third Truth, for all that I have just at present no
precise idea as to its nature. In consequence, I know the two objects
which you magnify are not all which exists. And I deny that their
never-ending search of each other is the one gesture of life. No: I at
least, I feel assured, am destined to take part in some quite other
gesture, of a more graceful and more cleanly and more dignified
nature,—a gesture of, it well may be, eternal importance....”

Yet Gerald glanced about him a little forlornly. This place was now
rather lonesome and ambiguous looking. In the crypt immediately beneath
him, Gerald knew, lay all that remained of King Peter and the most of
his numerous family; dozens upon dozens of peculiarly ugly objects were
there, all that remained of a great conqueror and of the queens who had
delighted him, all that attestedly remained now anywhere of a strong
hero’s pride and famous warfaring and of his many women’s loveliness....

“Oh, yes, it may be,” Gerald conceded, half frettedly, because he did
not like to be troubled with such reflections, “it may be that I am
wrong in this belief. And that seems to me yet another reason for
adhering to this belief. I, standing here alone upon the remnants of so
many utter strangers, admit indeed to some depression of spirits. It
seems to me, at this exact instant, that just conceivably I may be
neither a Savior nor a sun god nor a culture hero, but merely another
bull-headed Musgrave, for whom death waits, and after death, perhaps,
oblivion. Nevertheless, I find it a more beautiful and a much more
entertaining idea to believe in than to deny the immortality even of a
mere Musgrave. There is to my mind nothing at all interesting in the
idea of my own extinction. And it appears that my belief in this matter,
with no assured knowledge anywhere to go on, must be simply a question
of personal taste. Modesty even suggests that my belief is an affair of
irrelevance.”

And Gerald said also: “Therefore it furthermore appears to me, O
peculiarly unimaginative painting, a sheer waste of opportunity to
assume that anything is ever going to end even for a mere Musgrave all
conscious experience. I had far rather play with a beautiful idea than
with one utterly lacking in seductiveness. I very much prefer to believe
that I at least am, in one way or another, reserved to take part in some
enduring and rather superb performance,—somewhere, by and by,—in a
performance concerned with some third truth, more august and
æsthetically more pleasing than are the only ever-enduring truths
apparent to us here. We copulate and die, and that is all?—Well,
perhaps! But, then again, perhaps not! One must, you see, be
broad-minded about the matter.”

He for a moment kept silence. That regrettably candid painting and all
the other adjuncts of this place were certainly very depressing, now
that the learned diableries of the Fox-Spirit no longer enlivened this
tomb. Nevertheless, Gerald kept his long chin well up.

“Yes, every man ought to be broad-minded about this matter, and ought to
cherish always, if only as a diverting and inexpensive plaything, this
pungent notion of being immortal. It is really inexpensive, because,
should your notion prove ungrounded, you run no risk, no tiniest risk,
of being twitted, by and by, for credulity, or even of ever discovering
your error. Meanwhile this faith in your own durability and potential
importance is in some sense a cordial; and is in sundry ways a fine toy.
It renders life, and dying too, endurable: and it offers against all
vacant half-hours a variety of diverting speculations... as to that
possible third truth.”

Again Gerald paused. For it seemed to him, as he unwittingly repeated
the age-old self-persuasions of so many of his ancestors, that he had
found now another facet in this jewel of an idea that he was playing
with; and this fact considerably cheered Gerald.

“Then, too,” said he, “then, too, that rather wide-spread expectation of
an oncoming triumph—somewhere, in some hazed roseate arena, beyond the
discomforts of death and the incredible impudence of the mortician’s
titivating,—that triumph which is to be a perpetual triumphing of
justice and of rationality and of kindliness and of all the other
canonical virtues, this rumored triumph yet cows many persons, not
infrequently, into one or another thrifty-minded practice of these
generally beneficent virtues.”

Gerald said then: “It thus makes for, at any rate, terrestrial ease and
stability and repose: it gives people, as the phrase runs, something to
go by, in that it supports the most of every nation’s social and legal
rules of thumb. And it tends appreciably to limit men’s common greed and
viciousness, and all the harsher lusts of human beings, to exercises
through which there seems some quite tangible gain within tolerably safe
reach.”

And Gerald said also: “Yes: it is much better for men to believe in some
third truth which will be revealed to them after the death of their
bodies; and a general faith in the immortality even of mere Musgraves
appears to me, thus, very plainly, because of its happy blending of the
functions of a narcotic and of a policeman, a generally desirable
assumption. It remains in all ways a desirable faith, no matter whether
or not there be any grounds for it. And if this careful painting
presents the entire truth, that fact is but another excellent reason for
paying no attention to it.”

Gerald now felt quite comfortable through having listened so
respectfully to his own relentless logic.

“For these reasons, O foolish painting of the Two Truths, I deny your
fleshly significance. Whether I happen to be a sun god or a Savior or a
culture hero or just another bull-headed Musgrave, I deny that you
present to me any truth whatever. I snap my fingers at your materialism;
I turn up my nose at your indecorous anatomical studies; and I send the
divine foot of the Lord of the Third Truth smashing through your ancient
canvas. These things I do to proclaim the majesty of the Third Truth.
And I depart from this Peter and this Peter’s Tomb, to seek my appointed
kingdom.”

It was in this way that Gerald yet again put an affront upon Koleos
Koleros and upon the Holy Nose of Lytreia.




                               PART SIX
                          THE BOOK OF TUROINE

                     “Weathercocks Turn more Easily
                     when Placed very High.”




                                  20.
                        Thaumaturgists in Labor


GERALD passed on, still riding upon the silver stallion, which Evaine
the Fox-Spirit had not, after all, demanded of him that morning as her
promised honorarium. And the next place he came to, and where he got his
breakfast, was Turoine. This was a small free city given to sorceries of
two colors.

To every side of him the inhabitants of Turoine were about their arts:
and Gerald, as a former student of magic, quite naturally observed their
various activities with interest.

Now the first sorcerer that he encountered was making a figure out of
pink wax with which was mixed baptismal oil and the ashes of a
consecrated wafer. The next sorcerer was murmuring charms over a very
fat toad which was imprisoned in a net rudely woven out of the golden
hairs from the head of some luckless, unresponsive woman, who was now
about to meet a not wholly desirable doom after that toad had been
buried at her threshold. And the third sorcerer huddled over a small
fire wherein burned cypress branches and broken crucifixes and portions
of a gibbet. In his hand was a skull filled with dark wine which had
been seasoned with hemp and with the fat of a girl child and with poppy
seed: and his familiar, in the shape of a large dun-colored cat, was
lapping up that bitter drink.

No sorcerer anywhere in Turoine was idle upon this fine May morning. And
in this small, ever-busy city—where all the buildings were quaintly
marked with stars and pentagrams and the signs of the zodiac and the two
kinds of triangles, and were cozily overgrown with honeysuckle and arum
lilies and black poppies and deadly nightshade,—these sorcerers were
about a bewildering variety of studies.

“I,” one of them told Gerald, “am learning the secrets which proceed
from Saturn, that ashy lord of the greater infortune. I have especial
power over all husbandmen and beggars, over grandfathers and monks of
every order and ministers of the gospel, over all potters, and miners,
and gardeners, and cow-tenders. I have learned how to make men envious,
covetous, slow of thought, suspicious, and stubborn. And I am also able
to afflict whatsoever person I elect with toothache and dropsy and black
jaundice and leprosy and hemorrhoids, either severally or in unison.”

Another said: “I study to divine and to make smooth the approach of
every evil fortune,—with smoke and arrows and wax, with an egg, with
mice, and with the simulacra of dead persons;—but, above all, as you
may perceive, I have been most successful with the head of an ass in a
brazier of live coals. And my guide is not any bow-legged, swarthy
eunuch, but Leonard, the Grand Master of the Sabbat.”

“I,” said a third, “have found in Turoine the Great Juggle Bag, for my
guide is Baalberith. So have I mastered all kinds of unheard-of, secret,
merry feats and mysteries and inventions—”

“But what,” asked Gerald, “what purpose does your knowledge serve?”

“By means of it, sir, those who are favored by my lord Baalberith, the
Master of Alliances, may make real the sin performed in a dream; may
open the locked door of any jail or bedchamber or counting house; may
smite a husband with embarrassing weakness; may inspire strange maids
and married women with flaming desires; may increase his natural height
here by seven ells and here by three inches; may make himself invisible
or invulnerable; may change his form into that of a cat or a hare or a
wolf; may control thunder and lightning; may collect and talk with
snakes; and”—here the sorcerer coughed,—“and may perform five other
advantageous, extravagant and authentic devices.”

But Gerald shrugged. “These sciences are well enough for a sorcerer; and
I perceive that the industrious may pick up much useful information in
Turoine. But I am a god who travels toward his appointed kingdom, and
toward the mastery of secrets rather more vital than any of these. For
your arts are of that black magic which hurts but cannot help; your
guides are devils; and you deal only in misfortune and destructiveness.”

“Then perhaps, sir, you may be better pleased by the enchanters who live
at the other end of this city. For these enchanters have no guides save
restlessness and foiled desires and impotence; they get no direct aid
from hell, but from somewhat less ancient intellectual centres; and they
work all their magic, such as it is, with words.”

“And what does the magic of these same enchanters create?”

“It creates, sir, a comfortable sense of equality with your betters
wherever there is least reason for it.”

“I find that saying obscure. Nevertheless, I will visit these
enchanters,” said Gerald.

And he rode on.




                                  21.
                        They That Wore Blankets


THUS Gerald came to the enchanters who were used to perform all their
magic with words. And they greeted his coming with a very cordial
enthusiasm for creatures so gray and vague and bedraggled looking as
they sat huddled there, each one of them clothed in a blanket, and
thoroughly drenched as though with sour smelling rain.

Now the first enchanter to speak wore a violet blanket. He arose; and
dripping bilge-water everywhere about him in the while that he smiled
with wholly friendly condescension, he observed:

“Here is another rider on the silver stallion. Here is yet another
figure of papier mâché which Horvendile has despatched upon a profitless
journeying.”

“But I—” said Gerald.

Without at all heeding Gerald, a second enchanter, in a well soaked
green blanket, laid down his scissors; and he addressed the first
enchanter with some fervor, saying:

“Let us not speak harshly of our good Horvendile’s magic, for everybody
ought to respect the impotence of the aging. We must concede, of course,
that his magic is no longer fresh. It is not possible to deny that a
woefully infirm magic has set this papier mâché figure on a hackneyed
journeying. Candor compels us to grant that this journeying crosses once
sparkling rivers which have long ago run dry. We, as intelligent
enchanters, must admit that a wearying fog lowers thickly about this
journeying, that above it the sun of romance shines very pale and cold,
and that this journeying is sterile and empty of gusto. Nevertheless,
this journeying, as we ought not to ignore, is no doubt an afterthought,
it is the belated invention of a tired mind, and a desperate and
ill-advised proceeding. For these reasons, howsoever sorrowfully we, as
Horvendile’s fellow artists and well-wishers, must always deplore among
ourselves the kindergarten notions of this poor Horvendile, and his
ponderous playfulness, and the limitations of his few and unenterprising
ideas, still we must be careful not to apply to his magic one single
harsh word.”

“Yet—” Gerald stated.

Nodding in profound and entire approbation, with which Gerald was not in
any way connected, an enchanter in a sopping yellow blanket now
remarked:

“I, too, am always ready to defend the magic of our fellow practitioner.
My conscience forces me to grant that his magic is not faultless. In
mere honesty I have to confess that his magic is stupid and stilted and
silly; that it is sniggering and sly and nasty; that it wallows in a
morass of self-satisfaction; and that it is steeped and soaked in
ever-fretful egoism, in spite of our friendly candor in all dealings
with him from the very first. Nor can I dispute that our confrère
behaves too much like a decadent small boy who is proud of having been
haled into the police court for chalking dirty words on a wall. Apart,
though, from his stinking filth and his vileness and his tinsel
cynicisms, and aside from his bestiality and his vulgar frippery and his
dabblings in cesspools and his vapid sophistries, I stand always ready
to defend the magic of Horvendile, because it is not, after all, as if
he were a mage of any real importance, and one ought always to be
indulgent to persons of third and fourth rate ability.”

“Even so—” Gerald pointed out.

But now an enchanter in a thoroughly drenched scarlet blanket was
saying, as he meditatively unclosed his pastepot:

“I quite agree with you. Nobody admires the merits of our esteemed
confrère more whole-heartedly than I do. It would be merely silly to
deny that he has weakened his always rather wishy-washy magic potions by
too frequent blendings. It is impossible to ignore that his magic has
become a cloying weariness and a mincing indecency. We are forced to
acknowledge that Horvendile is insincere, that he very irritatingly
poses as a superior person, that he is labored beyond endurance, that he
smells of the lamp, that his art is dull and tarnished and trivial and
intolerable, but, even so, we ought also to admit that he does as well
as could be expected of anybody who combines a lack of any actual talent
with ignorance of actual life.”

“However—” Gerald explained.

The fifth enchanter to interrupt Gerald wore a black blanket; and he,
too, appeared to drip with wisdom and bilge-water and judicious
amiability in the while that he said:

“It is, in fact, alike our duty and our privilege to be most lenient
with this laborious bungler who, after all, is probably doing the best
he can. So I, for one, I never dwell even fleetingly upon the awkward
fact that the banality of his magic is no excuse for the way he botches
its execution. Indeed, I do not know but that a person of very lively
imagination might conceive of our confrère’s turning out worse work than
he does. Nor do I think I am being over-charitable. For, upon my
word,—while I can see that his magic is morbid, that it is sophomoric,
that it is malignant, that it is plagiarized, that it is intolerably
insipid, that it is sacrilegious, that it is naïve, that it is pseudo
whatever or other may happen to sound best, that it is over brutal in
cynicism, that it is incurably sentimental, and that it bores me beyond
description,—yet otherwise I can, at just this moment, think of no
especial other fault to find with his magic.”

So it was that these dripping and affable enchanters went on defending
Horvendile with such generous volubility that Gerald could get in no
word.

Then each took off the single garment which he wore, and so vanished,
because without their wet blankets these enchanters were in no way
noticeable. And Gerald rode away from that place contentedly, because it
was a natural comfort to know that he traveled with a guide and a patron
who was so well thought of by the best judges.




                                  22.
                      The Paragraph of the Sphinx


NOW upon the outskirts of Turoine, after Gerald had ridden through
this city, Gerald paused to talk with the Sphinx who lay there writing
with a black pen in a large black-covered book like a ledger. The
monster had so long couched in this place as to be half-imbedded in the
red earth.

“This partially buried condition, ma’am,” Gerald began,—“or perhaps one
ought to say ‘sir’—”

“Either form of address,” replied the Sphinx, “may be applicable,
according to which half of me you are considering.”

“—This semi-interment, then, madam and sir, is untidy looking, and
cannot be especially comfortable.”

“Yet I may not move,” replied the Sphinx, “in part because I have my
writing to complete, in part because I know all movement and all action
of every kind to be equally fruitless. So do I retain eternal bodily as
well as mental poise.”

“Such acumen borders upon paralysis,” Gerald said: “and paralysis is
ugly.”

“Do you not despise ugliness!” the Sphinx exhorted, “who have traveled
thus far upon the road of gods and myths. For what things have you found
stable upon this road save only Koleos Koleros and the Holy Nose of
Lytreia? and what is there more ugly than these two?”

Gerald replied: “That nose I found it my Christian duty to describe as a
tongue; and the lady whom they call Koleos Koleros I have not yet seen.
But, in any case, you, ma’am—for, after all, it is not quite nice for
me to have your loins upon my mind—No, really, it does seem more
becoming for me to treat you as a lady—”

“So, and do you find me ugly?”

“You mistake my meaning. I was about to observe that you, ma’am, also
appear tolerably stable. And the Mirror of Caer Omn, that likewise
remains in worship.”

“Dreams pass eternally varying through that golden mirror. Thoughts pass
eternally varying through my wise head. But all these dreams and
thoughts stay barren, as barren as they are irresolute. For we create
nothing. We control no material thing. And we aspire toward no goal.
That is why we are permitted to endure powerlessly in realms wherein two
powers alone are never barren; wherein they control all; and wherein
neither may ever be uncertain of its goal so long as the other
survives.”

Gerald found this wholly incomprehensible and of no striking interest.
So he only shrugged.

“Nevertheless, in my worlds,” Gerald said, “there shall not be any
ugliness.”

“Do you, then, possess many worlds?”

“Not as yet, ma’am. I allude to the worlds I shall create by and by,
when I have come into my kingdom yonder, in the place beyond good and
evil, and have regained my proper station as the Lord of the Third Truth
in the Dirghic mythology.”

Now the Sphinx frowned. “I perceive you are only another downfallen god
upon your journey to the Master Philologist. I might have guessed it,
for Thor and Typhon and Rudra and the Maruts and all the other storm
gods who have gone blustering downward into Antan, all had red hair.”

Gerald slapped his thigh.

“Upon my word, ma’am, but that is a real clue! The storm gods did, in
every mythology known to me, have red hair. I incline to believe that
the wisdom of the Sphinx has solved the mystery of my being. I am no
doubt a storm god also; I am rapidly becoming a complete pantheon upon
two legs; and at this rate my waistcoat will end by embracing pure
monotheism. Meanwhile I really do wonder, ma’am, at your offhand way of
speaking about the gods, and I wonder, too, what grudge you can have
against us gods?”

“For one thing, it is said that the gods created those men who interrupt
me in my writing to plague me with just such silly questions.”

“Men naturally seek wisdom from you, ma’am, to whom the whole story of
human life is familiar.”

“But the story of human life is not one story. There are three stories
of human life.”

“Ah, ah! And what are they?”

“Why, there was once a traveling man who came one night to an inn—”

“I believe I have heard of his indecorous adventures there. So do you
spare my blushes, ma’am, and tell me the second story!”

“It seems, then, there were once two Irishmen—”

“That anecdote also, in all conceivable variants, I am quite certain I
have heard. So what is the third story?”

“There was once a young married couple. And it seems that on the first
night—”

“Yet that story, in a great number of versions, is equally familiar to
me. And really, ma’am, I question if these intolerably hackneyed tales
sum up all human wisdom.”

“But the young married couple in the outcome got pleasure for their
bodies in the service of those two powers which I was just talking
about. The Irishmen found an unlooked-for drollness in the mechanics of
those two powers, which they preserved in a neat and nicely memorable
phrase, getting pleasure for their minds. So, by the way, did the two
Jews and the two Scotchmen. And the traveling man, upon the next
morning, after those same two powers had obtained their will of him,
went away from that inn, traveling nobody knows whither; and so got,
through a darker night, unbroken and uncompanioned sleep, unbothered any
longer by those powers. Thus these three stories really do sum up all
the gains which it is possible for a man to acquire through human living
and all the wisdom that it is salutary for any man to know about.”

“Well, that is as it may be! I am persuaded that in the goal of all the
gods there is a more august power than any which men know of hereabouts
assuredly. For I note the sympathy and compassion and love and
self-denial which human beings display toward one another, after all,
rather copiously. I reflect that every art is a form of self-expression.
And I deduce that the artist who created human beings was prompted in
his embodiment of all these qualities by sheer egotism. He observed
these qualities in his own nature: he approved of them: and so he
embodied them. No actually reflective person, therefore, will ever
imagine that human life does not go forward toward some kindly
winding-up, since none who finds philanthropy in his own heart can doubt
that philanthropy exists in the heart of his creator.”

“And does that stuff which you are now talking really seem to you,” the
Sphinx asked, “sensible?”

“My dear lady, it seems to me something far better: it seems to me a
rather beautiful idea. So I play with it sometimes. Now I dismiss that
idea, out of deference to your proverbial wisdom: and I ask what far
more gratifying and uplifting wisdom, ma’am, you may be writing in your
black-covered book?”

“Oh, yes, my book!” said the Sphinx, with the livelier interest natural
to an author. “You find me just now in some difficulty with my book. You
conceive there has to be an opening paragraph. It would not be possible
to leave out the first paragraph—”

“I can see that. I can recall no book in which there was not a first
paragraph.”

“—And this paragraph ought to sum up all things, so to speak—”

“That likewise is a familiar rhetorical principle—”

“—And it is with the composition of this paragraph that I am just now
having trouble.”

“Well, you could not possibly have consulted a more suitable person. I,
too, used to dabble in the little art of letters before I became a god
with four aspects. I am familiar with all rhetorical devices. I am a
past master of zeugma and syllepsis; at hypallage, and chiasmus also, I
excel; and my handling of meiosis and persiflage and oxymoron has been
quite generally admired. So do you read me your rough draft: and I have
no doubt I can arrange all difficulties for you.”

The Sphinx for a moment considered this suggestion, and, before the
prospect of a connoisseur’s efficient criticism, the monster seemed
rather shy.

“Do not be vexed unduly,” the Sphinx then said, “if you can find no
meaning in this paragraph—”

“I shall not be excessively censorious, I assure you. No beginner is
expected to excel in any art.”

“—For this paragraph was placed here simply because there happened to
be a vacancy which needed filling—”

“I quite understand that. So let us get on!”

But there was no hurrying the diffident Sphinx. “The foolish,
therefore,” the Sphinx continued in shy explanation, “will find in it
foolishness, and will say ‘Bother!’ The wise, as wisdom goes, will
reflect that this paragraph was placed here without its consent being
asked; that no wit nor large significance was loaned it by its creator;
and that it will be forgotten with the turning of the one page wherein
it figures unimportantly—”

“No doubt it will be!” said Gerald, now speaking a little impatiently,
“but let us get on to this famous paragraph!”

“—So do you turn the page forthwith, in just the care-free fashion of
old nodding Time as he skims over the long book of life: and do you say
either ‘Bother!’ or ‘Brother!’ as your wits prompt.”

“I will, I assure you, the moment your book is published. But why do you
keep talking about your paragraph? why do you not read me what you have
written?”

“I have just done so,” replied the Sphinx. “I have not been talking. I
have been reading ever since I said, ‘Do you not be vexed’ and now I
have read you the whole paragraph.”

Gerald said, “Oh!” He scratched his long chin a bit blankly. He
approached the monster, and leaning over one forepaw, he read for
himself in that black ledger the paragraph of the Sphinx.

Then Gerald said, “But what comes next?”

“Were I to answer that question you would be wiser than I. And of course
nobody can ever be wiser than the Sphinx.”

“But is that as far as you have yet written?”

“It is as far as anybody has written,” said the Sphinx, “as yet.”

“In all these centuries you have not got beyond that one paragraph?”

“Now, do you not see my difficulty? I needed an opening paragraph which
would sum up all things, so to speak, and all the human living which men
keep pestering me to explain. And when I had written it there was not
anything left over to put in the second paragraph.”

“But, oh, dear me! This is materialism! this is flat sacrilege committed
in the actual presence of a god! I am embarrassed, ma’am. I hardly know
which way to look before the spectacle of such conduct. For you fill
your page, with your ambiguous paragraph—”

“Do you not be vexed unduly if you can find no meaning in this
paragraph—”

“—Which has not anything to do with my exalted duties in this world—”

“This paragraph was placed here simply because there happened to be a
vacancy which needed filling—”

“But I am not a paragraph, ma’am! I am no less a person, I may tell you
in confidence, than Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and Preserver, the Lord
of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved of Heavenly Ones, upon a
journey,—quite incognito, and therefore unattended by my customary
retinue,—toward my appointed kingdom. And I confess that to my divine
mind your writing has not any valid significance—”

“The foolish, therefore, will find in it foolishness, and will say
‘Bother!’—”

“—And conveys no valuable lesson—”

“The wise, as wisdom goes, will reflect that this paragraph was placed
here without its consent being asked; that no wit nor large significance
was loaned it by its creator; and that it will be forgotten with the
turning of the one page wherein it figures unimportantly—”

“Quite honestly, ma’am, I am not a paragraph! No, I assure you that I
really am the Lord of the Third Truth, upon my way to rule over Antan. I
am the predestined conqueror who will force that irreligious Master
Philologist to refrain from any further evil-doing, and to turn over a
new leaf—”

“Do you turn the page forthwith, in just the care-free fashion of old
nodding Time as he skims over the long book of life—”

“Yes, yes!” said Gerald, smiling, “I was thinking you could bring in
that bit, neatly enough, if I gave you the simile to start on. And I
know, of course, how all you authoresses love to quote your own works.
So now, ma’am, if I were to remark, in a half puzzled way, that I hardly
know what to say about your irrational paragraph—”

“Do you say either ‘Bother!’ or ‘Brother!’ as your wits prompt.”

“Quite so! And that finishes it. You have now had the privilege of
quoting in the course of one conversation your complete collected works,
from cover to cover: and that ought to leave any authoress in a fairly
amiable frame of mind. My complaint, then, ma’am, is that you have
exhausted my time rather than your subject. There should be by all means
a second paragraph. You see, dear lady,—and I am speaking now from the
professional knowledge of a god,—it is the gist of every religion
that—still to pursue your bibliomaniacal metaphor,—one has but to turn
over that page in order to begin upon the most splendid of romances.”

“What kind of romance can any dead man be getting pleasure out of in his
dark grave?” the Sphinx asked, in frank surprise.

“Well, I must not speak over-hastily. I cannot supply offhand your
second paragraph until I have learned what the Dirghic religion states
to be the nature of this second paragraph.... For, you conceive, ma’am,
in the opinion of many wise and virtuous persons that paragraph deals
with a voyaging in the great sun boat, to a hidden land very far down in
the west, after the heart of each passenger has been weighed against a
feather, and forty-two judges have passed favorably upon his claims to
free transportation. But dissenters, just as wise and virtuous, and just
as numerous, declare the subject of that paragraph to be a pleasure
garden in which properly behaved persons will recline in continuous
tipsiness upon golden couches covered with green cushions, cosily shaded
by lotus- and banana-trees, and will have no other occupation than
perpetually to remove the virginity of large-eyed celestial ladies. Yet,
other sages declare that paragraph to deal with the crossing of a
bridge—in which transit a peculiarly obliging dog will serve as the
guide,—into the presence of the bright Amshaspands. Whereas, still
other estimable people contend that your second paragraph should treat
of a four-square city builded of gold and jasper, upon a twelve-fold
foundation of various precious stones, and irrigated by its own private
crystal sea.... For, I repeat, ma’am, the best-thought-of religions vary
quite noticeably as to the nature of this second paragraph: and it would
be wholly a sad thing if by speaking over-hastily I were to run counter
to my own mythology. But, in any case, I have no sympathy whatever with
the mental morbidity of such materialism as would deny the existence of
any kind of second paragraph.”

Then Gerald frowned, and he rode on.




                                  23.
                     Odd Transformation of a Towel


GERALD now passed beyond Turoine, and, crossing Mispec Moor, he came
thus to the tumbled-down hut of a decrepit old woman.

“And how are you called, ma’am?”

“What is that to you?” she answered, peevishly.

And this wrinkled creature seemed to Gerald remarkably red and inflamed
and regrettably hideous among her tousled tresses.

“Well, ma’am,” replied Gerald, pleasantly, “a name is a word: and words
are my peculiar concern.”

“If it matters to you, young Carrot-top, I have had many names. And
under one name or another I was used to deal with every man. Now my
powers fall into decay, and one month is like another month, with never
any changing in it. All about me is bleached, dearie, all is colorless.
There is no more employment for me: and I am an old worthless flabby
white-haired creature, still palely quivering with desire for the good
ever-busy days—oh, and for the nights too, dearie,—that are overpast.
Eh, dearie, though you would not ever think it, once I was Æsred, a
mother of the Little Gods and of much else. And I fared handsomely then,
taking liveliness and color out of all things, and turning men into
useful domestic animals. But now the world is old, and I am the world’s
twin: and all vigorousness has gone from me, and one month is like
another month, with never any changing in it.”

“I am a god who bring with me all vigor and all youth,” said Gerald: for
he remembered what the Sphinx had said about not despising ugliness.

Gerald spoke the appointed words: and he baptized the old whining trot
after the rite of the Lady of the First Water-Gap. He straightway saw
the dingy towel about her shaking head transformed. This towel had now
become a crown composed, a bit surprisingly, of the four suits from a
pack of playing cards. There were four clubs set upright, like the
strawberry leaves in a duke’s coronet, and alternated with four spades:
and the band of this crown was moulded in bas-relief with eight hearts
and with sixteen diamonds.

In fact, everything near Gerald was changed. To Gerald’s right hand and
to his left were seen neat fields and green things growing pleasantly,
and the tumbled-down hovel was now a spruce new cottage. But what seemed
even more interesting to Gerald was the circumstance that the wrinkled
angry looking old woman had become a quite personable creature, not
young and callow, but in the very prime of life: and the name of Æsred
now, as she told him, and as he noted at least two other reasons for
believing, was Maya of the Fair Breasts.

But she said also, forthwith: “Now that I am young, and have not any
chaperon in the house, it would look better for you to be getting on
with your journey, because you know how people talk. Yes, and how quick
they are to be talking about all widow women anyhow—”

“Oh! oh!” said Gerald: “are you not, then, prepared to trust me?”

“—With or without,” continued Maya, “the least provocation. As for
trusting you or any other young fellow living, I never heard before of
such nonsense. It is only the elderly men that any woman can depend on,
just as far as she can see them, in broad daylight, a good while after
they can be depended on at night.”

“You are not even ready to give me all?”

Maya was reasonable. “I will give you your dinner, and on top of that
your hat. For I can have no vagabond god hanging around my neat cottage
when I am trying to get the dishes washed, and have the name of a widow
to keep respectable.”

“Here,” Gerald stated, with conviction, “is an unusual woman. I search
the pages of history in vain to find any parallel to the strange
behavior of this woman.”

And Gerald reflected. Very certainly this Maya of the Fair Breasts did
not excel all the other women his gaze had ever beheld. Yet the colors
of her two eyes were nicely matched, and a fairish nose stood about
equidistant between them. Beneath this was a tolerably good mouth, for
all that the lips were sullen: and the indefinitely brownish hair, which
was queerly arranged in nineteen formal braids, no doubt concealed a
pair of well-enough ears. This rather heavy-visaged woman was reasonably
young, she seemed hardly more than thirty-seven or thereabouts: she
exhibited no deformity anywhere: her figure was acceptably preserved,
her breasts were positively alluring.... In fine, the appraising glance
of the young man could with the kindly eyes of twenty-eight perceive in
her no really grave fault.

Moreover, she reminded him of no woman that he had ever seen anywhere
before this morning.

So Gerald said: “I am satisfied. I shall stay for dinner. I shall
thankfully accept all the refreshments you proffer, of every kind.”

Then Maya answered: “But, indeed, you sauce-box, you quite misunderstand
me. So do you keep your proper distance! For I am not the sort of woman
that you seem only too well acquainted with.”

Gerald said, with a caressing thrill in his voice, “Yet, do you but
answer me this very simple question—”

Maya replied, “Oh, get away with you!”

Thus speaking, she boxed the jaws of the predestined ruler over all the
gods of men; and with a few well-chosen words she placed their
relationship upon a more decorous basis.




                              PART SEVEN
                           THE BOOK OF POETS

                      “He Goes Farthest That Knows
                      Not Where He is Going.”




                                  24.
                             On Mispec Moor


GERALD, after they had dined, persuaded Maya of the Fair Breasts to
permit him to rest over for supper also, now that his journeying was
virtually complete. For beyond the home of the wise woman upon Mispec
Moor the way lay unimpeded to the ambiguous lowlands of Antan, where
Queen Freydis and her consort the Master Philologist ruled in, it was
said, a very old, red-pillared palace which had once belonged to still
another queen, named Suskind.

But, as to this Antan, Gerald could not, even now, learn anything quite
definite, because of all the gods and myths who had passed down into
Antan none ever returned. It thus stayed, as yet, regrettably dubious
whether these glorious beings now all lived together in unimaginable
splendor, as Gerald had gathered at Caer Omn; or whether, as ran the
gloomier report which prevailed in Lytreia, they had each been destroyed
by the Master Philologist.

In any case, from Mispec Moor you clearly saw Antan. Thus, there
remained for Gerald hardly more than an hour’s ride, and perhaps a
morning’s spirited work, in order to complete his predestined conquest
of his appointed kingdom. Gerald therefore rested until to-morrow, with
this not over-hospitable hostess,—who viewed him with such uncalled-for
suspicion that (as he found toward midnight) the woman had actually
bolted the door to her room, out of a foolish notion that he might be
trying to enter this immovable door, from which he was, instead, with
entire dignity tiptoeing away. He rested so as to be in his very best
fettle when he approached, to-morrow, the climax of his superb
achievements.

Meanwhile he questioned Maya of the Fair Breasts as to his future
kingdom; and she told him it was a poorly thought-of place. Nobody ever
went there, Maya said, except such trash as poets and threadbare myths
and over-inquisitive persons and such celestial riffraff as had lost
their station in human esteem and their priests and their temples, said
Maya, nodding her head rather gravely. That curious crown of hers
sparkled cheerily with every movement of her head, for she sat at the
window in a patch of sunlight, about her darning. And as to what became
of such worthless people, Maya continued, after they reached Antan,
that, certainly, was a question of no importance—

“Yes, but what is the general opinion hereabouts, among the sorcerers
and enchanters of Turoine?”

“Our opinion is that the matter is not worth bothering about.”

“Yes, but what do you think—?”

Maya looked up from her darning, in mild but candid surprise. “You
really do ask the silliest questions! For one, I do not think at all
about those outcast tramps and vagabonds except to see that they steal
nothing as they go by.”

So then Gerald questioned her about Freydis.

“I have heard of the woman,” said Maya, rather absent-mindedly, as she
went on with the darning upon which stayed fixed her actual
attention,—“of course: but nothing to her credit. They report, for
example, that she has a mirror—”

“I, too, have heard continually of that mirror, but never of exactly
what she does with it.”

“For that matter, Gerald, I also have a mirror, if that is all which is
needed. Everybody has a mirror. In fact, I have a number of mirrors.”

“I know. I have noticed them everywhere about the cottage. But all your
mirrors, dear lady, are rose-colored.”

—To which Maya replied irrelevantly, and without looking up from her
darning: “But did you not know from the first that I was a wise woman?
In any case, it is said that Queen Freydis holds her mirror up to
nature, and that she does not scruple to hold this mirror up to her
disreputable visitors, too. For they really are, you know. It is all
very well being a god while it lasts. Only, it never does. And then
where are you? Why, exactly! That is why the overlords of Turoine have
always seemed to me more business-like. And there is no flaw in it,
people say,”—now, though, as Gerald deduced, Maya was talking about the
Mirror of the Hidden Children,—“no distortion of any kind, no
flattering in it, and no kindly exaggeration. It is not in anything like
my more sensible rose-colored mirrors. And nobody could of course be
expected to approve of such a mirror.”

“Nevertheless, if there indeed be any such mirror, I mean to face it,
when to-morrow I enter into my kingdom, and liberate the great words of
the Master Philologist, and restore the Dirghic mythology, for in that
mythology, I must tell you, I am a god with four aspects.”

“What nonsense you do talk!” said Maya, comfortably, as she slipped the
darning-egg into another stocking.

Then Gerald confided in her. Then Gerald told Maya of how he, howsoever
unmeritorious, was heir to all the unimaginable wonders which harbored
yonder. He told her that he and none other was Fair-haired Hoo, the
Helper and Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved of
Heavenly Ones. He told her of everything that had happened in his
triumphant expedition, thus far. He told her of somewhat more than had
happened, for under Gerald’s expansive handling of the rather beautiful
idea of his own invincibility the tale became an epic. And Gerald told
her, too, of how he intended to rule in the goal of all the gods. He
briefly indicated his summer and winter palaces, the probable personnel
of his harem, the deities who would serve in his immediate household,
and, in a general way, the worlds which he would create: and he promised
to remember Maya, liberally, after he had come into his kingdom.

And Maya all this while went on darning placidly. She admitted that
men—

“But, as I was telling you, I am a god,—a god with no less than four
aspects.”

That did not really matter, Maya considered. The gods, as near as she
had been able to judge those scatter-brained ne’er-do-wells that went
tramping by, were just the same, and, if anything, more so. It was
simply incredible, she continued, how little wear there was in a
stocking nowadays. She then admitted that male persons did have these
notions, even about such unlikely places as Antan. And Gerald would, in
any event, be finding out for himself all about Antan to-morrow, because
if he for one solitary instant thought she was going to have him hanging
about her cottage forever—!

“Come now, my dear, but hospitality is a very famous virtue: and,
besides, you owe it to me that you are now the handsomest woman in these
parts.”

“But that, Gerald,—even if it were the truth, of course, for you need
not think you are fooling me, you scamp,—that is just why people will
be imagining things if you continue to stay here.”

“Then let us take good care not to be suspected unjustly, because that
would be unfair to everybody—”

“Oh, get along with you! and do you pick up every one of those
stockings, too, now you have scattered them all over the floor. And
really, you red-headed pest, I am not joking, either. That horse of
yours—”

“Ah, yes, that horse of mine! I admit that to the discerning eyes of a
woman it is not the handsomest beast in the world. And I suppose you are
about to point out that this horse is unworthy of me, and that I ought
to dispose of it, in one way or another—”

“But whatever nonsense are you talking, now! It is an extremely handsome
horse. There is some sort of prophecy about it, too, is there not? So
you would be even more foolish than you seem to be, to part with that
horse.”

“Well, to be sure, there may be something in what you say.”

“—And what I was attempting to tell you is that, if you will simply
permit me to talk for one minute without interrupting—”

“Hereafter I remain as quiet, my dear, as a belch in polite society; and
you may go on.”

“Why, then, I was trying to say that your horse can get you to Antan
within an hour. You can find out for yourself all about the place. And I
daresay this Queen Freydis, from all I have heard of her, will not have
the least objection to your rude way of grabbing and pawing at people
and interfering with my housework and generally misconducting yourself.
It is the sort of thing she is quite used to. But I do not like it: I
feel you would not do it if you really respected me. And I am sorry if
anything I have said or done has given you any such wrong notions about
me. And if you stuck yourself with that needle it was simply your own
fault. And that is all there is to it.”

Gerald replied: “You are regrettably lacking, my dear, in the confidence
and the generosity peculiar to your sex. It is impossible for the mind
to conceive of anything more dreadful than your conduct. Nevertheless, I
must stay until Wednesday, for otherwise I cannot possibly judge of your
magics.”

“Oh, very well, then!” Maya answered, with unconcealed regretfulness
over the fact that she would have to put up with Gerald for yet another
day.




                                  25.
                            The God Conforms


FOR Gerald, upon reflection, had decided it would be really amusing to
remain upon Mispec Moor until Wednesday, since only upon Wednesday could
Maya show the perfection of her thaumaturgy. Thursday, though, as the
wise woman forewarned him candidly, was her cleaning day; and she simply
could not be bothering over company with the house all topsy-turvy.

“And I also warn you well in advance, my darling,” said Gerald, “that
the performance must be gratis, since I have no material possessions,
save possibly my riding-horse, to barter for the privilege of witnessing
your parlor magic.”

“Why, but what in the world would I be needing with another horse, who
already have dozens of them eating their heads off all over the moor?
and when in the world, you pest, I became ‘your darling’ I would really
like to know!”

“Now, but have you, indeed? The very first moment I saw you, my dear.”

“I do wish you would sometimes, just for a change, talk half rationally.
And of course it has always been my custom to further the true happiness
of the men with whom I was particularly intimate by turning them into
domestic animals of one kind or another. Quite a number of them came out
horses—”

“I do not altogether approve of such a custom. Still, women have
incalculable fancies: and all men find out sooner or later that it is
less trouble to indulge these fancies than to thwart them. At any rate,
a god has no concern with these minor sorceries.”

“Of course not!” Maya agreed. “A scatter-brained, talk-you-to-death,
carrot-topped, and generally good-for-nothing god is not concerned with
anything except with getting on to that minx Freydis.”

Gerald waved aside the insinuation. He continued to talk about more
immediate matters, and he said:

“Nevertheless, your story interests me. It would be droll to have a
horse like that. So suppose, now, my dear, suppose that I trade my
divine steed for one of those unusual horses of yours?”

“No, Gerald, really I would rather not. For the men that I put my magic
upon used once to be fine knights or barons or even kings,—and, for
that matter, there were a couple of emperors, though only in a small
way,—and I confess to a certain sentiment about them still.”

Then in a clay chafing-dish Maya of the Fair Breasts burned fig-leaves
with benzoin and macis and storax. And she showed Gerald how one might
master mercurial things. She displayed to him the small magics which are
Wednesday’s. She revealed to him—cursorily, since they had only a
morning at their disposal,—the secrets of remunerative mediocrity in
the learned professions, in truth-telling, in upholstering, in the
removal of mountains into the sea, in the erection of bridges over any
unpassable place, in the preparation of rose-colored mirrors, in
criticism, in oratory, in jurisprudence, and in the safe interpretation
of Holy Writ. As himself a former student of magic, Gerald found these
formulæ of interest: but, as a god, he regarded Maya with profound
respect, as one who, with no native divine advantages, had yet mastered
this quite reputable stock of knowledge and ability.

Yet the workings of these magics were not apparent until Gerald had put
on the spectacles which Maya gave him. He found these glasses so
soothing to the eyes that he retained them, just for the remainder of
his visit to her cottage.

For, after all, Gerald decided to stay over the week-end, since Maya was
so unflatteringly eager to be rid of him. It was an eagerness troubling
to his self-respect. Here was he, a god whom women had always run after,
and had pestered beyond reasonable endurance, here was he, of all
persons, being treated with unconcealed indifference by a mere
hedge-sorceress, by a creature who had not even any remarkable good
looks or wit to justify her impudence. This Maya of the Fair Breasts
needed taking down quite a large number of pegs. So Gerald fell to
wooing her with an ardor that somewhat surprised him. For it was
eminently necessary, it was, indeed, a rather beautiful idea, to win the
woman, and then to jilt her, so as to teach her, once for all, not ever
again to make free and easy with the will of a god.

Meanwhile, Maya had suggested that he conceal the fact he was a god; and
that she should introduce him to the local gentry of Turoine as a
visiting sorcerer.

“For I must tell you, Gerald,” Maya said, “all the best-thought-of
people hereabouts are in one or another branch of sorcery. We have,
thus, never had any relations with Heaven. All our connections have been
with another quarter. And it is not that we are unduly conceited and
exclusive, it is simply that it has just happened so. Nevertheless, so
many gods have straggled by, on their way to an ambiguous end, as they
went down to encounter the Master Philologist, and whatever it is that
he does to them, that there is a tendency among the best people
hereabouts, as I will not conceal from you, to regard them as not quite
the sort that one meets socially.”

“But I—!” said Gerald, in uncontrolled indignation.

“I know, my poor boy, you are entirely different. And I am perfectly
broad-minded about it, myself. But other people are not. And it would
sound much better.”

Then Gerald spoke with dignity and firmness. Gerald said that not for
one moment would he stoop to such a subterfuge. Not for an instant would
he who was a lord of all exalted white magics pretend to be a sorcerer
soiled with infernal traffics and patronized by mere devils. After that,
Gerald passed as a visiting sorcerer.




                                  26.
                           “Qualis Artifex!”


AND Gerald used to amuse himself by talking with the travelers who
passed by the neat log and plaster cottage of Maya the wise woman, upon
their way to the court of Queen Freydis and her consort the Master
Philologist. For it was a good and shrewd policy, Gerald felt, for a
monarch to familiarize himself with his future subjects: so he would sit
by the wayside, in the shade of a conveniently placed
chestnut-tree,—incognito, as it were,—and would artfully allure them
into conversation.

“Hail, friends! And what business draws you to the city of all marvels?”
said Gerald, on the first morning that he fell into this long-sighted
course.

He was told—by the big-bellied, yellow-haired man, whose skin was so
curiously spotted,—that they were two poets upon their way to Antan,
the goal of all the gods, and the friendly haven of true poets, where
poets might hope to find at last that loveliness which they desired and
could nowhere discover in their everyday life upon earth. To Gerald this
was excellent news, since it increased the number of his future subjects
very gratifyingly.

But he said nothing, while the big-bellied, spotted, thin-legged
gentleman in the purple robe adorned with golden stars, went on in his
answer to Gerald’s first question, by explaining that the speaker was
Nero Claudius Cæsar, the king of all poets, and that his scrawny
companion, in a brown doublet of which both elbows needed patching, was
an artist of considerable talent from out of the Gallic provinces, who
was called François Villon.

Gerald found this also of some interest, in view of what he remembered
about the Mirror of Caer Omn. Not often did you thus come face to face
with two discarded personalities. But Gerald said nothing about this
either. Instead, he questioned Nero yet further, and he thus learned
that these two poets were on their way to the court of Freydis, because
there alone in the universe was art properly regarded: for there,
indeed, true artists were manufactured out of common clay, and were
informed with the fire of Audela.

It was one or another old hero from out of Poictesme, Nero had heard,
who had first modeled these earthen images; and Freydis, as occasion
served, gave life to these images and set them to live upon earth, as
changelings. But, above all, said Nero, in Antan the true poets of this
world fared happily among the myths and the gods who once had afforded
to these poets such fine themes, so that to-day of course these poets
wrote even more splendid poems now that they composed with the eye upon
the object.

Yet, Nero thought, playing idly with the emerald monocle which hung upon
a green cord about his scrawny neck, this Queen would not be very likely
ever to create in clay, or to find coming to her court, such another
artist as Nero himself had been in the days of his Roman pre-eminence.
No other person known to him had ever excelled in all the polite arts.
For in dancing and in oratory, in wrestling (even with such dreadful
adversaries as lions) and in music both vocal and instrumental,—alike
as a charioteer and as a tragic actor,—but, above all, as a poet, and
equally as a dramatic, a lyric and an epic poet,—Nero had been
unanimously awarded the first prize in every contest. He did not care to
appear boastful: yet, by all canons of criticism, one had to consider
the list of his overwhelming triumphs, in Rome, in Naples, in Antium, in
Alba,—at the Parthian games, at the Isthmian games, at the Olympic
games,—and, in fine, in each contest which Nero had ever entered
anywhere in all the kingdoms of which he was Emperor. No other artist
had a record to compare with that: no other of the world’s great
geniuses had ever been confessedly supreme in every polite form of
æsthetic endeavor.

Of course, as a student of history, Nero conceded that the elect artist
was not to be placed, not permanently, by his ranking in the eyes of his
contemporaries, who might often be swayed by such matters, really
extraneous to enduring art, as the artist’s ingratiating manners and his
personal beauty. As a man of the world, he even conceded the judges of
the sacred games in awarding all the first prizes to Nero might
furthermore have been influenced by the large sums of money which the
Emperor always conferred upon his acclaiming judges after such
occasions, as well as by the dexterity of the tortures which would have
followed any decision less just.

But the indisputable fact, the fact of superb importance, was that Nero
had made of his life a poem which was wholly a unique masterpiece in the
way of self-expression: he, above all other men, had served the one end
of every poet’s art, by revealing the true nature of man’s being; for
Nero had embodied, with loving carefulness, each trait which he found in
himself, through some really memorable action,—rearing, as it were,
among marshes and quicksands, and in yet other places which other
persons feared to visit, those strange and passionately colored orchid
growths which alone could express the highly complex nature of every
man’s desires—

“That jargon becomes somewhat senescent,” said Gerald. “Still, as a
museum piece,—yes, even now, sophistication does display something of
the quaint beauty of thorough obsoleteness. It has acquired the charm,
and, as it were, the patina, of sedan chairs and of full-bottom wigs and
of girdles of chastity and of suits of armor, and of all other things,
once useful enough, which are nowadays endeared to every poet’s heart by
the fact that they are forever outmoded. So let us grant it, O Cæsar, in
the days that are gone you were a devil of a fellow and a sad rip among
the ladies—”

“Why, but, for that matter—” Nero began.

“I know. You broad-mindedly despised neither sex. You were in amour a
Greek scholar. You were something of a surgeon also. I concede it, I
blush, and I urge you to omit all embarrassingly personal details.”

So Nero went on, saying that other emperors, with very much his chances,
had lacked the genius necessary to develop these chances. There had, of
course, been minor artists. Caligula, for example, among so much
hackwork in the way of throat-cutting, had shown at least one jet of
rather lovely inspiration when he attempted a criminal assault upon the
moon; that was a really finely imagined bit of work. Then, also,
Domitian and Commodus and Tiberius had displayed praiseworthy ambitions;
quite neat little things had been done by Tiberius, in an amateur way,
at Capri; Caracalla too had been so-so: but they had all tended to
wallow unimaginatively in cut and dried executions; merely to chop off
anybody’s head was not art, no matter how often you did it. Besides,
work done upon a public scaffold inevitably coarsened one’s touch. And
Heliogabalus, whatsoever the lad’s thin vein of undeniable talent in the
way of lyric lechery, had lacked the stamina and gusto for any sustained
masterpiece in Nero’s copious epic style.

For Nero alone had been, in every branch of self-expression, the
sincere, skilled artist, enriching his handiwork always with that
continual slight novelty which art demands. He had builded his
appropriate stage, in the Golden House—

“A house entirely overlaid with gold,” said Gerald, reminiscently, “and
adorned everywhere with jewels and mother of pearl, a house so rich and
ample that it had three-storied porticos a mile long, and huge revolving
banqueting halls, and ivory ceilings which perpetually scattered
perfumes and red rose-petals—”

Nero, at that, had out his emerald monocle; and through it he now
regarded Gerald with the childlike amiability of a sincere artist
whensoever his vanity is flattered.

Yes, Nero admitted, he had endeavored to express himself in that house
also. The Golden House had been (to play with metaphor) the handsome
binding of that poem which was his life, when in a setting such as the
world had never known, before or since, he had given to his every human
trait its full color value. In the Golden House he had reared his
orchids, he had labored to open many frank and incisive and utterly
unstinted avenues of self-expression to that somewhat complex thing
called human nature....

But here he entered rather explicitly into details. Gerald felt the
style of this emperor to be growing woefully un-American; and Gerald
fidgeted.

“Let us, I again urge you,” said Gerald, “speak of less personal
matters, and diversify the vividness of these orchids with a few
fig-leaves!”

Perhaps, of course, the Emperor continued, he, like every other really
great artist, had been somewhat the anthologist, in that he had invented
outright none of the art forms among the many in which he had
distinguished himself. He had taken over from his predecessors a number
of inspirations and a formula or two, as he would be the very last to
deny: but the fine craftsmanship was all his, as well as that
distinguishing, that peculiarly Neronic, touch of romantic irony, by
virtue of which this artist had slain with suavity, had destroyed with a
caress, and had ennobled all that was most dear to his human nature by
killing it. He spoke now of the deaths of his wives, of Octavia and
Poppæa, and of others who had been his wives just for the evening; he
spoke of Sporus, of Aiëtes, of Narcissus, and of that other exceedingly
beautiful boy, Aulus Plautinus....

And again Gerald raised a protesting hand. “Let us still,” said Gerald,
“avoid these quite un-American personalities! Meanwhile, you do not
speak of your mother Agrippina.”

He surprised in the spotted face of Nero something very like terror. But
Nero said only, “No.”

And besides, the Emperor continued, with rising animation, that happy
chronological accident, the fact that Christianity began in the days of
Nero its advance toward world supremacy, had enabled him, by pure luck,
to lend to the great poem of his life just the needful felicitous touch
of working in a new medium. To burn well-thought-of taxpayers and
putative virgins as the torches at your supper parties was a device
which, out of a natural desire to surprise and to amuse one’s guests,
might have occurred to almost any host in quest of that continual slight
novelty which the art of hospitality also demands. But that these
flambeaux should later become the brightest glories of a triumphant
church had made these supper parties, which were really quite modest
affairs, unforgettable. Nero had expressed himself—not merely, as he
thought at the time, through persons supposed to be deficient in
patriotism and more or less suspected of being (here again, to play with
metaphor) not one hundred per cent Roman,—but, as it had turned out,
through saints and apostles, and through consecrated religious martyrs,
such as not every artist could get for his themes and raw material. So,
the succeeding discouragements of Christians had, æsthetically, fallen
flat, in their impression upon posterity: their authors had come into
this field too late, to find that tragic vein worked out, and all its
most striking possibilities exhausted, by the great artist that was
Nero. It was hardly remembered that Marcus Aurelius and Diocletian and
many others had broken and flayed and mutilated and burned to the very
best of their ability: these plodders were but the epigoni and the
unimaginative plagiarists of Nero.

So had it come about that of all the emperors Rome had known, and of all
the tyrants and despots in every land and era, who had followed the fine
art of self-expression, and who had shown what human nature really
is—in, as it were, the nude, when any man is released from time-serving
and is made omnipotent,—of all these, there had remained just one whose
name was remembered everywhere; just one whose fame was imperishable;
just one who had become a never-dying myth: and that one was Nero. The
legend of Nero was, in a world wherein every other man stayed more or
less unwillingly an unfulfilled Nero, the supreme type of the literature
of escape. The legend of Nero was a poem which men would not ever
forget: it was a poem current in all languages: and it was a poem which,
now, everybody could cordially admire and delight in, because time had
removed the need of considering any current moral standards or one’s own
physical safety in judging this poem, now that Nero was only a character
in a book, like—as the Emperor said, with a quaint revealment of his
retained interest in literature,—like Iago or Volpone or Tartuffe. For
whether you called any particular book a history or a poem or a drama
did not, of course, effect the impressiveness and vigor and complexity
of the character drawing in it, nor the value of the author’s apt and
edifying revelations as to any eternal verities of man’s being.

“For, certainly,” said Nero, “my life presented, as no other artist has
ever done, the gist of all human nature as that nature actually is, when
freed of such inhibitions as constrain it in but too many baffled lives.
My life was, thus, a connoisseur’s production, and a work of art which
escaped even the grave risk of anti-climax. For there was not anything
lacking in the ending of it, either. My fall and the circumstances of my
death were so æsthetically right that, as an artist, I never in my life
enjoyed anything quite so much. Nothing could conceivably have been in
better taste. For, overnight, as you may remember, I passed from the
throne of the world, to hide in a tumbled-down out-house, under a
ragged, very faded blue coverlet, and to perish thus by my own
hand,—with an appropriate tragic verse upon my lips,—and without any
friend remaining anywhere. No tragedy could have been more boldly
proportioned, with all the Aristotelian unities so exactly preserved.
And it was most gratifyingly led up to, too. For just as I was about to
approach the dénouement of my poem, the statues of my Lares tumbled down
miraculously, the hind quarters of my favorite riding-horse were
transformed into the hind quarters of an ape, and the doors of the
mausoleum of Augustus having unclosed of their own accord, there issued
from the tomb a divine voice which summoned me to destruction. These
incidents, I repeat, were gratifying, for they showed that the exercise
of my art had been viewed by Heaven appreciatively. Ah, yes, in all I
was peculiarly favored.”




                                  27.
                          Regarding the Stars


VILLON spat meditatively between his yellow front teeth. He fingered,
in the while that he continued his reflections, his scarred and puckered
lower lip. Then he confessed that he dissented from a great many of his
predecessor’s remarks.

“You were impressive. Your life was a competent job, boldly executed,
and nobody denies its merits on their own melodramatic plane. Yet it
lacked the indispensable touch of tenderness, without which no work of
art is of the first class. No: it was I who was truly favored; and I
made of my life a flawless poem without dragging in such gaudy
accessories as thrones and burning cities and the wasting of a lovely,
mother-naked virgin on a mere lion.”

And this François Villon went on to speak of the great blessings which
had been accorded him. He had been granted irresolution, and lewdness,
and poverty, and cowardice, and a large weakness for drink, and an
ingrained dishonesty, and a disease-wrecked body, and everything else
which was needed to make him a knave as contemptible as any man could
hope to be.

“I was, in brief, gentlemen, as I have elsewhere remarked, a hog with a
voice. And there was no voice like my voice.”

For out of the mire that wallowing, lustful and cowardly beast had sung.
Now he sang jeeringly, and made fun of the whole world with satire and
mockery and invective, and with plain filth-flinging,—which was all
quite good art, because it pleases people to see a man superior to his
fate. Now he sang piercingly of the great platitude that death conquers
and ruins everything: and to that sentiment nobody can ever turn a deaf
ear, because it is the only sentiment with a universal personal
application. But, above all, he sang of his regret for his past
indiscretions, and of his yearning for spiritual cleanliness,
and—“soaring,” as Villon now quoted, with admirable complacency, “to
the very gates of Heaven upon the star-sown wings of faith and
song,”—he had proclaimed his trust in that divine love which,
ultimately, would redeem all properly repentant persons from the logical
outcome of their doings in this world, and would give to the marred life
of every properly repentant person a happy ending in a fair-colored
paradise agreeably full of harps and lutes. And people liked that, too,
of course, because such a philosophy made everybody feel muggily
consoled and, for no especial reason, magnanimous.

So had Villon become a very great poet whose art was a fine blending of
mirth and of pathos and of faith, and so might he hope to win to high
honors in Antan, where, if anywhere, poets were properly rewarded. And
the squalor and degradation of his terrestrial living were, now, but so
many picturesque ingredients in the superb poem of his life, now that
Villon too was—just as his Roman confrère had pointed out,—to be
regarded as a character in a book. The difference was that Villon had
become a never-dying myth of vagabondage with its heart in the right
place, and a parable which revealed how much of good always survives in
the most vile and abandoned of criminals and even in persons
unsuccessful in business life. The legend of Villon thus proved exactly
the contrary to that which was proved by the legend of Nero: as the one
demonstrated the real nature of man to aspire only to lust and cruelty
the moment that inhibitions were removed, so did the other legend show
the real fundamental nature of every man to be incurably good and
lovable under all possible surface stains. And the legend of Villon,
Villon repeated, had in it tenderness,—that indispensable flavor of
tenderness and of a sentimentality as wholesomely nourishing as
molasses, without which no work of art can ever really be of the first
class so far as goes its popular appeal.

“For my life, gentlemen, was truly a superb parable. And it has been
properly appreciated, it has ever been paid the fine compliment of being
plagiarised by Holy Writ. Why, what the devil! if the parable of the
Prodigal Son be good art in the New Testament, is it the less good art
for being acted out with the vigor and the brio I brought to that task?
For I too wasted all my substance, with some feminine assistance, and
went down among the swine and the husks, without ever forgetting that by
and by I was to be comforted with never-failing love and veal cutlets.
In brief, although I lived perforce in the gutter, yet my eyes were upon
the stars.”

Then Gerald remarked, to this one of his discarded personalities: “You
move me, Messire François. You sound upon my heart-strings a resounding
chord, through your employment of a figure of speech which is always
effective. I do not know why, but any imaginable bit of verse conveying
a statement manifestly untrue can be made edifying and sublime through
ending it with the word ‘stars’. We poets have convinced everybody,
including ourselves, that there is some occult virtue in the act of
looking at the stars. So, when you said just now, ‘Although I lived
perforce in the gutter, yet my eyes were upon the stars’, I was moved
very mightily. I seemed to hear the yearning cry of all human
aspirations, foiled but superb. Yet if you had asserted your eyes to
have been habitually, or at least every clear night, upon the
planets—or, for that matter, upon the comets or the asteroids,—I would
not have been moved in the least.”

“It is sufficient that you were moved without knowing why,” observed
Nero. “That is the magic of poetry. Very often when I recited some of my
best poems, to commemorate the sorrows of Orestes or Canace or Œdipus, I
myself could not quite understand the springs of that terrible misery
which convulsed my hearers. They wept; they fainted; a number of the
women entered prematurely into the labors of childbirth; and I was
compelled to have the doors and windows guarded by my Praetorian
soldiers because so many of the audience invariably attempted to escape
from the well-nigh intolerable ecstasies which my art provoked. Such is
the magic of great poetry, a thing not ever wholly to be explained even
by the poet.”

Then Gerald said: “Yet, you two poets who have traveled through the
Marches of Antan, wherein only two truths endure, and the one teaching
is that we copulate and die,—do you not look to find when you have
reached Antan, which is the goal of all the gods, some third truth?”

And it seemed to him that the faces of the two myths had now become
evasive and more wary.

Nero replied, “For a poet, there exist always just as many truths as he
cares to imagine.”

And Villon remarked: “I would phrase it somewhat differently. I would
say there exist more truths than any poet cares to imagine. But it comes
to the same thing.”

“Yes,” Gerald assented,—“for it comes to an evasion. Yet I, who also am
a poet, I retain my faith in the rather beautiful idea of that third
truth.”

And then Gerald told them that he himself had long dabbled in the art of
poetry. “Indeed,” he added, generously, “I will now recite to you one of
my sonnets which appears appropriate to the occasion.”

“Dog,” Villon replied, taking up his hat, “does not eat dog.”

And Nero very hastily stated that, howsoever unbounded their regret,
they really must be hurrying on to the city of marvels.

So these myths departed, traveling together, with an intimacy somewhat
remarkable in the light of their flatly diverse teachings. And Gerald
warned them to make the most of the present state of affairs in Antan,
because the day after to-morrow the Lord of the Third Truth, a deity
with several not uninteresting aspects, would be descending upon Antan,
to take over all the powers of the Master Philologist, and to deal with
Queen Freydis afterward as his divine inclinations might prompt.

Thereafter Gerald went back to Maya and to his dinner quite jauntily,
now that he knew in his appointed kingdom the true poets of this world
were assembling to purvey his amusement: and he felt himself to be afire
with impatience to reach that city of all marvels, yonder behind him, as
he walked away from Antan, leisurely ascending to the trim cottage of
Maya the wise woman, who went as a crowned queen, and would have none of
his love-making, and yet was such an excellent cook, in her plain way.




                              PART EIGHT
                           THE BOOK OF MAGES

                        “Not Every Good Scholar
                        is a Good Schoolmaster.”




                                  28.
                          Fond Magics of Maya


GERALD delayed his departure until Friday, because Gerald was
cordially amused by the fond magics of Maya of the Fair Breasts. He
regarded them, as he did her, through those roseate spectacles which the
wise woman had loaned him to be an unfailing comfort to his eyes: and he
found all very good.

He had known many lovelier and more brilliant women, alike in the
relinquished world of Lichfield and in his journeying through the
Marches of Antan. But Maya contented him: he had really not the heart to
disappoint his Maya by not forcing upon her—after four prolonged and
tender arguments,—those physical attentions which all women seemed to
expect.

After that, she put aside her crown; and Gerald never saw it any more.

And after that, also, the date of his departure from her neat cottage
was postponed until after Sunday, though it was quite understood that,
the very first thing after a particularly early breakfast on Monday, he
would pass on to enter into his appointed kingdom, and to possess
himself of the Master Philologist’s great words, and to reanimate the
Dirghic mythology in which he was a god, and would come to know the
third truth over which he exercised celestial authority.

Meanwhile he stayed upon Mispec Moor, to regard with indulgence, and
even with some pity, his predecessors in Maya’s affection, those
beguiled men whom she had converted into domestic animals. His divine
steed was for the while turned out to graze with those docile geldings
that had once been knights and barons and reigning kings: all wandered
contentedly enough about the neat cottage, along with a number of steers
and sheep and three mules, who, also, had once been noblemen and
well-thought-of monarchs.

Gerald saw that these animals seemed not dissatisfied with their
transfiguring doom. Yet it appeared a bit wanton—even to him, who had
once been a tortoise and a lion and a fish and a boar pig,—that these
gentlemen should have been snatched from positions of responsibility and
worldly honor, from thrones and tournaments and large bank accounts, and
set to eating grass in a field. And Gerald sincerely pitied them for
their ignorance as to the correct way in which to deal with the small
magics of Maya.

The dear woman herself you could not blame. She could not help trying,
out of pure kindliness and affection, to hold men back from daring and
splendid exploits, because she really thought they would be much safer,
and more happy, as domestic animals.

And, in fact, she justified her charitableness with a logic which was
plausible. She argued that all men were better content after they had
become domestic animals. She pointed out that her lovers, in
particular—Why, but Gerald could see for himself how little vexed were
her steers and geldings, now, by affairs of the heart. Upon every
imaginable moral ground they had been made better by their double
transformation. They did not run after lewd females, they were not
bloodthirstily jealous of one another, and they were asleep every night
at a respectable hour. If Gerald had only known them, as she had known
them, when they were gentlemen of high distinction and reigning
monarchs, he would never argue about an improvement so obvious.

Besides, domestic animals were spurred by magnanimity and altruism into
no devastating wars, thrift did not often make them covetous of money,
neither did self-respect induce them to spend money foolishly: religion
did not lead mules to bray in any pulpit, nor did the conscientiousness
of a sheep ever make of him an ever-meddling and pernicious pest. In
fine, the domestic animals were undisfigured by any human virtues, and
were quite easy to get along with. Whereas, if any woman attempted to
have that many men about the house—! Maya, who had lost so many
husbands (at least partially) did not complete the statement. But her
expression made the aposiopesis eloquent.

Gerald had no smallest doubt but that, if he himself had not been divine
and beyond her arts, Maya of the Fair Breasts would long ago, out of
pure kindliness and affection, have transformed him too into a sheep or
an ox or some other useful quadruped, and would thus have held him back
from his appointed inheritance in Antan. And he did not blame her. The
placid, stupid, rather lovable woman simply did not understand that to
be contented was not all: she did not comprehend the obligations which
were upon a god to live with generous splendor and to perform very
tremendous feats in the way of heroism and of philanthropy.

Of course, just as she said, the exploits of a champion who came to
enlighten and improve any place—even to redeem it from what, by the
standards of the United States of America, was iniquitous and backward
and probably undemocratic,—did of necessity upset the routine to which
the inhabitants had grown accustomed. Antan, as Gerald looked down upon
it from the porch of Maya’s cottage, seemed a contented and tranquil
realm. No matter by howsoever un-American standards people might be
living there, to redeem the place from those standards would bring
upsetment and confusion. And it did seem almost a pity—just as Maya
said,—to be bothering people who were contented enough, when you too
were contented.... Even so, there was an obligation upon a god. To be
contented, to have no cares to worry you by day, to lack for nothing by
day, and every night to induce decorously through connubial affection a
profound and refreshing slumber,—that was not everything a god desired.
Yonder there was a third truth. Yonder was Gerald’s appointed kingdom,
and not here upon Mispec Moor.

Besides, Gerald had begun to wonder more and more about Freydis. By all
reports, it was she who really ruled those hills and lowlands yonder,
which to-morrow—or at least, next week,—would be Gerald’s hills and
lowlands; and it was she who controlled in everything the Master
Philologist, whom Gerald was appointed to overthrow. It had not been
prophesied, however, so far as Gerald knew, how he would deal with
Freydis. That, to every appearance, was a matter left to his divine
election. Well, one would not be over-harsh with any woman whom rumor
declared so beautiful, Gerald decided, half drowsily, as he sat there so
utterly comfortable in the spectacles and the dressing-gown and the
brown carpet slippers which Maya had provided, and so pleasantly replete
with Maya’s excellent cooking.




                                  29.
                           Leucosia’s Singing


AND upon another day, as Gerald sat by the roadside beneath his
chestnut-tree, and waited for supper to be ready, three persons passed
toward Antan, traveling together. They were all notable looking men; and
Gerald greeted them with the sign which is known only to supreme mages.
They returned his greeting, but they shaped signs that were of an older
magic than any which was familiar to Gerald.

And then the first of these men said, “I was Odysseus, Laertes’ son.”

Gerald thus knew that before him stood yet another of his discarded
personalities. But Gerald made no comment.

And Odysseus continued: “I had wisdom. My prudent wisdom was to men of
every calling an object of considerable attention, and the fame of it
reached Heaven. I ruled in Ithaca, an island kingdom, well situated
toward the west. I went unwillingly with the other well-greaved Greeks
to besiege Ilion: the enterprise to me seemed rash, and unlikely to be
remunerative: yet, being engaged, I dealt prudently, and in the end,
where so many merely brave persons had failed, it was through my
prudence that the enterprise succeeded. For ten years Ilion defied the
strength of Achilles and of Ajax; Ilion derided all the endeavors of
auburn-haired Menelaus and of godlike Agememnon: but the cunning of
Odysseus felled Ilion in one night. I took my share of the spoils; I
left the glory to them that wanted it. I returned across the world to
that which I more prudently desired, toward the quiet comforts of my
home in craggy Ithaca. The prayer of the blinded Cyclops, the wrath of
earth-shaking Poseidon, the white thunder of offended Zeus, and the
twelve winds of Æolus, all fought against me. I prevailed. The sea-witch
Scylla, an exorbitant lady with twelve arms, a ravening monster whom
none might pass and live, I passed. Charybdis, which devoured all, did
not devour me, for I clung prudently to a fig-tree.”

“Indeed,” said Gerald, “the leaves of that tree are very often a great
protection,—O much-enduring and crafty Odysseus,” Gerald added hastily,
as became a Greek scholar.

“Moreover, the sun’s daughter, fair-haired Circe, and bright Queen
Calypso, the divine one of goddesses, these also detained me rather more
amiably. I embraced them; they did not find me slothful in their beds.
For they were goddesses, as quick in anger as they were in lust. It is
not prudent to deny a goddess. From the fond arms of these immortals I
passed on toward my desired goal. Yet nobody is always prudent. When my
ship approached the island of the man-devouring Sirens I caused the ears
of my sailors to be stopped with wax; but I caused myself to be bound to
the mast, so that I might hear the song which Leucosia sang in the while
that Parthenopê and Ligeia made a sweet music. I desired to hear without
any hurt that song which was so lovely that it drew less prudent men to
the arms of its singer, wherein, as they well knew, dark death awaited
them. I heard that song. It did not matter to me that I saw how the low
beach about those music-makers gleamed, like silver, where a thin
sunlight fell upon the scattered bones of many men whom they had slain.
I struggled to cast myself into the gray sea-water, so that I might go
to Leucosia. But my bonds held me. I was bound, both my hands and feet
were bound, with very strong cables. The black ship passed onward,
whitening the water with its polished blades of fir-wood; and I wept as
I too passed onward, away from my own ruin, and drawing nearer to the
goal which my prudent wisdom had desired.”

“Truly, the enchantment of her singing must have maddened you. Yet such
is the magic of great poetry,” Gerald remarked, “a thing not ever wholly
to be explained even by the poet.... Yet your goal, nevertheless, was
reached, they tell me, O much-contriving Odysseus. Your goal was
reached, as I remember it, in the many-pillared hall of your home in
Ithaca, and in a fine slaughter of those suitors who were pestering your
wife because they believed that she was your widow.”

“Very naturally my goal was reached. I was Odysseus. Very naturally I
made an end of those wasters of my substance who had been eating and
drinking for nine years at my expense. There arose, as one by one their
heads were smitten off, a hideous moaning. The floors ran with blood. It
was wholly plain that Odysseus faced those imprudent persons who had
made over-free with his flocks and his wine jars and his wife and the
other goods of his household. Yet I knew, by and by, that what I now
desired was not to be found in craggy Ithaca nor in the calm embraces of
Penelope nor in the tranquillity of my well-ordered home. I gave laws. I
heard cases. I decided squabbles between one shepherd and another
shepherd. I who had contrived the burning of Ilion now oversaw the
branding of my cattle. War did not trouble Ithaca, of whose king all
other kings were afraid. For I was very famous. I lacked for nothing in
wealth. I lived at ease. But no man hears the singing of Leucosia except
at a great price. I heard Leucosia no more. I heard, instead, the voices
of fools praising my strength and my prudent wisdom, and the voice of my
wife talking sensibly about I never noticed exactly what. I lacked for
nothing which prudent men desire, in my snug, sleek, well-ordered
Ithaca. But I had seen too much in my voyaging about a world which was
more lewd and riotous than I permitted anybody to be in my Ithaca. I
remembered too many things. No, I did not regret Calypso nor Circe nor
that fine girl Nausicaä. I could at will have returned to them. But I
remembered the singing of Leucosia, to whom I dared not return. For no
man hears the singing of Leucosia except at a great price.”

“But of what did she sing, O much-planning Odysseus?”

“She sang of that which haunted me, and which derided the rewards of my
prudent wisdom. She sang of the one way to that which I truly desired.”

“That, O noble son of Laertes, is not a remarkably explicit reply.”

Now the wise Greek regarded Gerald sombrely. Odysseus said, by and by:

“She sang of that which troubles a prudent person’s soul and despoils
his rational living of all fat contentment. Let it suffice that she
sang, I think, of Antan. That is why I must travel to Antan, wherein—it
may be,—is my desire.”

—It was only then that Gerald recollected something. He recollected
that Evadne of the Dusk, that feathery-legged Evadne, who, Horvendile
had said, was called Leucosia in the days of her sea-faring. But Gerald
said nothing about what, after all, was none of his affair....




                                  30.
                          What Solomon Wanted


AND then the second traveler spoke. He spoke of that which had been
his in the days when all riches and all pleasures and all power had been
accorded to Solomon because of his sixfold wisdom. To no other being
that ever lived among mankind was given such mightiness as was granted
to King Solomon in the time that he reigned over Israel and ruled this
world.

For Solomon had sexanary wisdom. Solomon knew the six words which were
not known to any other men. He understood the speaking of these words.

The word of the beasts. It was spoken, and there assembled in the sight
of Solomon a pair of every creature that walks or creeps upon earth,
from the elephant to the smallest worm. Upon the neck of each was
pressed the seal of Solomon, so that the race of each must henceforth be
subject to him. They revealed to him the wisdom of the beasts that
perish and do not bother about it. He feasted them at a table of silver
and iron which covered four square miles; and at that banqueting Solomon
the King served as the pantler, bringing with his hands to every beast
and reptile its food according to its kind, from the elephant to the
smallest worm.

The word of Morskoï. It was spoken, and all manner of fishes rose to the
surface of the sea’s water near Ascalon. Upon the neck of each was
pressed the seal of Solomon. Then came a hundred thousand camels and a
hundred thousand mules laden with new corn, and all the creatures of the
water were fed, and after that they served King Solomon, and they
revealed to him the wisdom of the Sea Market.

The word of the fowls. It was spoken, and the sky was hidden by the
birds who came to render fealty and to instruct King Solomon in the
wisdom of the Apsarasas. The peewit alone did not come. But he came
afterward, crying, “He that hath no mercy for others, shall find none
for himself.” And it was the peewit who fetched to Solomon wise Balkis,
and who taught Solomon to look through the surface of this earth as a
man peers through a sheet of glass.

The word of the Adversary. It was spoken, and the entire citizenry of
hell kneeled before King Solomon, saving only Sachr and Eblis. The
female Djinns were shaped like dromedaries with the wings of a bat; the
male Djinns were like peacocks with the horns of a gazelle. The Mazikeen
and the Shedeem came also. To the neck of each was pressed the seal of
Solomon: and they revealed to him both the black and the gray wisdom.

The word of Arathron. It was spoken, and there came to King Solomon the
Seven Stewards of Heaven. The eyes of Solomon were closed, and his hand
had shaken a little, as he pressed to the neck of each kneeling Steward
the seal of Solomon, for he was troubled by the exceeding glory of the
supreme Princes of Heaven. Of these the most terrible were Ophiel and
Phul, whose reign is not yet. But these seven Stewards also served King
Solomon; and they revealed to him the white wisdom.

The word of the mirror. It was spoken, and before him stood a wicker
cage containing three pigeons. Beside this cage lay a small mirror three
inches square.

All these six words were known to the wise King. It was the power of
these six words which made him lord over the wild beasts and the birds
of heaven, and over the devils and the elemental spirits and the ghosts
of the dead, and over the sea-depths, and over the cherubim. All
creatures upon earth trembled before King Solomon because of these six
words: no other king withstood Solomon, nor sent forth his chariots
against the army of Solomon. For the soldiers of Solomon were the beasts
of the field and of the wild wood; the birds of prey were his horsemen;
the little birds were his very cunning spies. His admirals were the huge
whales and sea serpents, and Leviathan also served in the navy of King
Solomon. His lieutenants were the overseers of hell; the supreme angels
were his counsellors. He had also his mirror. The power of these six
words was exceedingly great.

Yet there remained one other word, that word which was in the beginning,
and which will be when all else has perished. There stayed yet
unrevealed that word which is spoken by the Master Philologist to all
the gods of men. That word alone was not known to King Solomon. His
little mirror showed him that word, as it showed every other thing; but
the word was written in a language which he could not read.

“What need is there for you to be bothering about that word?” said all
the women who loved and cherished him. He answered, “I do not know.” The
wives and concubines then stated, speaking with nine hundred voices in
unanimity, that no one of them had ever before heard of such nonsense.
And he answered them again, “I do not know....”

For this reason King Solomon must pass down into Antan, to hear the
speaking of the last great word of power.




                                  31.
                         The Chivalry of Merlin


THEN said the third of these wise men: “I was Merlin Ambrosius. The
wisdom that I had was more than human, for it came to me from my father.
But I served Heaven with it. The land was starved and sick and
frightened. Many little chieftains fought in its wild naked fields, and
murderously waylaid one another in its old forests, causelessly. I made
the land an ordered realm. I gave the land one king, a king whose sword
was as bright as thirty torches. That sword flashed everywhither about
the land to enforce justice and every other virtue commendable to
Heaven. Arthur Pendragon and the knights who served him all served my
whims. They were my toys.... I in my playing gave to the gaping,
smooth-chinned boy, and to his shaggy followers, a notion to play with
in their turn. This notion was that each one of them, and that every
other man, was the child of God and his Father’s vicar upon earth; and
that each human life was all a journeying home, toward a not ever ending
happiness, and that it was a journeying which should be performed in a
style appropriate to Heaven’s heir apparent. Those savages believed me.
They were joyous both night and day. They learned to be envious of no
one, to love God, and to support no unjust cause. They learned to speak
seasonably and graciously, to be generous in giving, to clothe
themselves neatly, and to sing and dance, and to war fearlessly against
evil. It all quite upset my father.... Yet my notion was, I still
believe, a very beautiful notion. It created beauty everywhere, because,
as I have said, the heir apparent of Heaven must journey homeward in an
appropriate style. Yes, the results were eminently picturesque. Caerleon
arose; there was no city more delectable upon earth than was the
pleasant town of Caerleon, builded upon Usk between the forest and the
clear river. Arthur sat there upon a daïs over which was spread a
covering of flame-colored satin. Under his elbow was a cushion of red
satin. The lords and princes and the knights sat about King Arthur
Pendragon, each in his order and degree. The oppressed and the unhappy
came to Arthur. He was to the young a father, to the old a comforter.
Wrong was loathsome to him, the right was very dear to Arthur, and he
knew not what it was to fear. My father did not think at all well of
him.... But I was pleased with my toys, for now I found in every part of
the land a romantic strange beauty. The knights rode at adventure upon
enormous stallions. They clanked as they rode. They went masked in blue
armor and in crimson armor and in silver-speckled green armor. Upon
their heads were brightly colored lions and leopards and griffins and
sea horses, and very often their helmets were wrapped about with a
woman’s sleeve. The giants that these knights fought against were mighty
giants who ate at one meal six swine: the dragons that they fought
against were marvelous huge worms with shining scales and wattles and
magnificent whiskers. The maidens whom they rescued were each more
lovely than the day. These maidens had blond curling hair and frontlets
of red gold upon their heads. About each tender and rose-tinted body was
a gown of yellow satin. Upon the feet of these maidens were shoes of
variegated leather fastened with gilt clasps.... In fine, the heirs of
Heaven discharged their moral and constabulary duties quite
picturesquely as they rode homeward. It was in this way I who was Merlin
Ambrosius played with heroic virtues: it was thus that I who was the son
of my father made, for my amusement, men that were more virtuous and
colorful than Heaven had ever been able to make them. Still, still, it
really was a rather plainly outrageous notion upon which all this was
founded: and by and by the dear and droll, and heart-breakingly
beautiful antics of my flesh and blood toys did not content my desire.”

Gerald remarked, now that the old gentleman had paused in his meditative
speaking, “Your desire, Messire Merlin, as I remember it, was for an
enchantress who outwitted and betrayed you.”

“Men,” Merlin answered, with a grave smile, “have made a mistake in that
report. Is it likely that I could be outwitted? No: I was Merlin
Ambrosius.”

And then Merlin told Gerald about the child Nimuë, who was the daughter
of the goddess Diana, and of how old, wearied, over-learned Merlin had
come to her in the likeness of a young squire. He told of how they
played for a long while with his ancient magics, there in the spring
woods, beside a very clear fountain in which the gravel shone like
powdered silver. To make this twelve-year-old child laugh, as she did so
adorably, the mage had turned into prettiness and drollery every
infernal device. He created for the child Nimuë, there in the April
woods, an orchard full of all those fruits and flowers, howsoever
unseasonably mingled, which have the liveliest sweetness and flavor.
Phantoms danced for her wide-eyed amusement, in the shaping of armed
knights and archbishops and crowned ladies and goat-legged fauns: and it
was all quite excellent fun.... Then Merlin told to Nimuë, because she
pouted so adorably, the secret of building a tower which is not made of
stone or timber or iron, and is so strong that it may never be felled
while this world endures. And Nimuë, the moment that he had fallen
asleep with his head in her lap, spoke very softly the old runes. In the
while that she continued to caress her lover, she imprisoned Merlin in
an enchanted tower which she had builded out of the magic air of April
above a flowering white hawthorn-bush, so that Nimuë might keep her
wonderful, so wise, dear lover utterly to herself.

“And I was happy there for a long while,” said Merlin. “My toys, now
that I played no more with them, began to break one another. Dissension
and lust and hatred woke among them. They forgot the very pretty notion
which I had given them in their turn to play with. The land was no
longer an ordered realm. My toys now fought in the land’s naked fields,
and they murderously waylaid one another in its old forests. Arthur was
dead, at the hands of his own bastard son begotten in incest. It was an
awkward ending for the heir apparent of Heaven. The Round Table was
dissolved. The land was starved and sick and frightened.”

Now Merlin, the old poet who did not any longer delight to shape and to
play with puppets, had paused: and he sat gazing thoughtfully, with
wholly patient, tired eyes, at nothing in particular. Then Merlin said:

“I heard of all these things. They did not matter. I was happy. Yes, I
suppose that I was happy. My ways were utterly domestic. They stayed
thus for a long while.... There was no variety. In that small heaven
which a child had builded out of the magic air of April there was no
variety whatever. There was no enemy, no adversary for me to get the
better of through some cunning device. There was only happiness....
Nimuë stayed always young and kind and beautiful and contented just
because I was there. The child loved me. But there was no variety. No
son of my father stays forever a domestic animal. So in the end I who
was Merlin Ambrosius found my desire was not in that tower of April air.
There was only heaven. There was only just such a never-changing
happiness as I had once talked about to the gaping, smooth-chinned boy
and to his shaggy followers.”

“Yet how could you escape from the blessings of a happy home-life,
Messire Merlin, if that tower was truly enchanted?”

“It does not seem reasonable that I should tell you all my secrets,”
Merlin replied, drily, “any more than it seemed reasonable that the son
of my father should share every secret with Nimuë. The child loved me
utterly. And I loved her. Yes, I loved Nimuë as I have loved no other
creature fluttering about earth. She did not seem to walk.... Even so, I
was Merlin Ambrosius. So in the end I left my child mistress. I quitted
the small heaven which a child’s pure-mindedness had contrived. And I go
now into Antan to get, it may be, my desire.”

Then there was silence, now that the three mages had all spoken.

And Gerald shook his head. “You gentlemen have talked with gratifying
candor. You have expressed yourself, with chaste simplicity, in very
plain short sentences. You have reasoned powerfully. You imply that
neither a wife nor a mistress, or even a harem, is able to dissuade a
wise man from this journeying toward the goal of all the gods. I infer
that, to the contrary, the domestic circumstances of no one of you were
wholly satisfactory in the old time. Well, that is a situation still to
be encountered more frequently than is desirable, even in Lichfield, and
it is the reason that I too am on my way to Antan. I am stopping here
just for the week-end. Yet I still do not know what in the world you
gentlemen really desire.”

“For one, I desire nothing that is in this world,” replied Odysseus.

“Yet, do you but answer me this very simple question! What do you three
expect to find in Antan? Because I can assure you that, after the
impending changes to be made in the government and other civic affairs
of Antan by the Lord of the Third Truth,—a deity, gentlemen, with
several not uninteresting aspects, a deity with whom I may without
boasting say that I have considerable influence,—why, then, the moment
everything is in tolerable working order, it will be a real pleasure to
afford you three gentlemen all possible courtesies.”

But the three mages did not seem impressed.

“I was wise,” said Solomon. “I knew all things save one thing. I did not
know that word which was in the beginning, and which will be when all
else has perished. And that word no god knows until he has heard it
spoken by the Master Philologist.”

“My desire,” said Merlin, “was for the maid Nimuë and for the love of my
child mistress. When I had my desire it did not content me. So I now go
into Antan to find, it may be, something which I can desire. But my
father’s son does not go asking favors of any god.”

Then Gerald said: “Yet, you three mages who have traveled through the
Marches of Antan wherein only two truths endure, and the one teaching is
that we copulate and die,—do you not look to find in the goal of all
the gods some third truth?”

And it seemed to him that the faces of these myths had now become
somewhat evasive and more wary.

But they said only, speaking severally: “A wise man knows that no truth
is affected either by his beliefs or by his hopes.”—“A wise man accepts
each truth as it is revealed to him.”—“A wise man will risk nothing
upon the existence of any truth.”

“Still, gentlemen, these are enigmas! These sayings are not a plain
answer to a plain question: and I do not quite understand these
sayings.”

They answered him, “There is no need that you should understand.”

Then these three passed down toward the sunset statelily. And Gerald,
gazing after them, once more shook his red head. These wise myths seemed
to him in a bad way: it would not be easy to content the more eminent
sages among his future subjects, because these three at least, for all
their wisdom, appeared never to have found out what they wanted.

Gerald shrugged. He, in any event, perfectly well knew what in this
bracing country air he wanted at once. So Gerald went in at once to
supper with his Maya who was such an excellent cook in her plain way.




                                  32.
                      A Boy That Might As Well Be


“WHAT more is needed,” Maya had asked, “to make this last day with me
pass pleasantly?”

—For this, again, was the very last day which Gerald could possibly
spend in the trim log and plaster cottage. Maya had decided, without any
reticence, that it was high time he attended to whatsoever foolishness
he seemed to think himself committed to, in that disreputable low place
down yonder, and that to keep putting it off in this way looked like
shirking, and that, for her part, she simply could not understand why he
did not get his nonsense over with....

And Gerald said, “It would be nice if we had a son.”

But Maya at once dissented, as, it seemed to Gerald she nowadays
dissented, at least in part, from everything that Gerald proposed.

“No, Gerald,” said Maya. “For you would grow far too fond of him. You
would be foolish about him. You would be unwilling to leave him, you
probably never would leave him. And it would end in your being in my
way, and bothering me in the night season, and being under my feet all
day, for the rest of your life—”

“But I am a god—”

“Yes, Gerald, to be sure, you are. I had forgotten. I apologize. Now, do
not be upset about it! Stop pouting! You are a god, that is quite
understood. You are immortal, you are going to outlive me indefinitely,
and you are going to perform wonders in Antan, and it is all going to be
very nice. I hope so, anyhow. I was only saying it would be much better
for us to have no son.”

But Gerald answered: “Do not keep contradicting me in that maddening
way! If you again fly out at me like that, Maya, you will rouse my
temper. Then I shall rage and roar and, quite possibly, ramp. I will
bluster and speak harshly. I will huff, I will puff, I will blow the
house down. For I insist it would be quite nice if we had a son.”

“Oh, very well, then!” said Maya; and she turned with that sulkiness
which she ever and again displayed—nowadays,—toward a large basket of
magics.

“—I mean, though, once he were old enough. Babies are too limited in
conversation, they are too vocal, and they are too leaky.”

Maya had lifted from an amber basin a small shining lizard. She held it
toward her mouth, breathing softly upon the creature, in the while that
she answered Gerald.

“I think, myself,” said Maya, “that, since you insist upon having a son,
he might as well be seven or eight years old to begin with.”

Then Maya took off the top of the basket, she reached far into the blue
basket with the hand in which she held the shining lizard, and out of
this basket, clinging to Maya’s hand for support, climbed a freckled
red-haired boy, about eight years old, in blue garments, and having as
yet only one upper front tooth.

“We have now got a splendid son,” said Gerald, contentedly. “But who is
to christen our son? For I shall of course call him Theodorick Quentin,
just as my father and my oldest brother were called.”

The boy was, thus, named Theodorick Quentin Musgrave, and Gerald
delighted in the child. For the Lord of the Third Truth put off once
more his entry into his kingdom....

“I told you so!” said Maya.

“But, really now, my darling, would you have me lacking in all proper
paternal feeling! It is necessary I give the child a fair start in life;
and I ask you, candidly, could any parent discharge that duty, with any
real thoroughness, in less than a week?”

“That, though, is not at all what I said. And for any full-grown man to
be talking such nonsense—”

“So now you see for yourself! Therefore I shall be leaving you both next
Tuesday, and it is quite useless for you to implore me to stay a
half-second longer than that. Besides, I rather like him.”

Yet the child showed peculiarities. For one thing, his tongue had no red
in it, but was formed of perfectly white flesh. When Gerald noticed this
odd fact he said nothing about it, though, because Gerald comprehended
the limitations of gray magic. And for another thing, on the third day
of Theodorick’s existence, Gerald happened to lay aside his rose-colored
spectacles while he was playing with his son. Then the boy was not
there. Gerald shrugged, just in time to avoid shuddering. He replaced
his spectacles, and all was as before, to every freckle and each red
hair.

After that, Gerald wore his spectacles always.

For Theodorick Quentin Musgrave had become very dear to him. No more
than any other father could Gerald rationally explain this dearness or
justify it by any common-sense logic. He only knew that the brat aroused
in him a tenderness which came appreciably near to being unselfish; that
it worried him to have the brat go unchristened in this neighborhood so
full of sorcerers and wizards; that when he touched the brat it pleased
him, for no assignable reason; and that when the brat displayed the
mildest gleam of intelligence, it at once seemed quite brilliant and
profound, and inexpressibly beyond all other people’s children.

For Theodorick noticed everything. And Gerald delighted particularly in
the child’s intelligence and powers of observation, because, since no
sort of cleverness could possibly be inherited from poor dear stupid
Maya, all the boy’s more excellent mental traits were obviously
paternal.

For example, “There is a lady,” Theodorick had stated, pointing toward
Antan.

“Oh, any number of ladies, my son,” Gerald assented, as he thought of
the many beautiful goddesses and feminine myths who (for all that, he
reflected, he had never seen any female creature pass toward Antan) must
be aiding to make yet more glorious that kingdom over which Gerald would
by this time next week be ruling.

And Gerald’s hand went to the shoulder of the freckled brat whom, after
next week, he would not ever be seeing any more: and Gerald wondered at
the wholly illogical pleasure he derived just from touching this child.

“Oh, yes, there are no doubt a great many ladies in Antan,” said Gerald,
“and the coincidence is truly quaint that I have not yet seen any woman
traveling in that direction.”

But the boy explained he meant the very large lady lying down over
yonder as if she were dead, but not dead, because her heart was
breathing.

Then Gerald saw that, in point of fact, the hills toward the southwest
had, from this station, the shaping of a woman’s body. She seemed to lie
flat on her back, with her long hair outspread everywhither about her
head, of which the profile, now that you look for it, was complete and
quite definitely formed. Also you saw her throat and her high breasts,
whence the hills sloped downward into the contour of a relatively
smallish, flat belly. Just here the outline of the vast violet-tinted
figure was broken by the nearer green hill immediately across the road
which led to Antan, but all that you could see of this womanlike figure
was complete and perfectly moulded. Moreover, Gerald noted that, near
where the heart would have been, a forest fire was sending up its
languid smoke, which was, of course, what Theodorick Quentin Musgrave
had meant by saying that the lady’s heart was breathing.

Gerald was very proud of Theodorick’s cleverness in noticing the shaping
of these hills, which Gerald himself had not ever observed, in the
entire three weeks he had spent upon Mispec Moor. But when this odd
accident of nature was pointed out to Maya, she only said that she saw
what you meant of course, but that, after all, it was only two hills,
and that hills looked much more like hills than they looked like
anything else.




                               PART NINE
                        THE BOOK OF MISPEC MOOR

                 “To Tame the Wolf You Must Marry Him.”




                                  33.
                         Limitations of Gaston


IT WAS at this time, toward the middle of June, that Gaston Bulmer
came from Lichfield. Gerald was sitting, as was his daily custom now,
under the chestnut-tree beside the road which led to Antan. He waited
there to engage in conversation the next of his future subjects who
might pass by in that perpetual journeying toward Antan. Gerald, under
this same chestnut-tree, had by this time talked with many such
unearthly wayfarers: and if the rather interesting things they had told
him were all written down, it would make a book unutterably enormous and
utterly incredible.

In such circumstances it was, just after two not unfamiliar mountebanks
had gone by carrying with them the paraphernalia of their Punch and
Judas show, that Gerald noticed a small sulphur-colored cloud sweeping
rapidly from the east. It descended: and when it was near to Gerald, it
unclosed. Gaston Bulmer then stepped, a bit rheumatically, from its
glowing depths, and he laid down a rod of cedar wood tipped with an
apple carved in blue-stone.

There was not in all this anything in itself astonishing, since Gaston
Bulmer was an adept in the arts of which Gerald, in the strange days
before he knew that he was a god, had been a student. But to note how
Gaston had aged in the last week or so was astounding. Yet Gerald, in
any case, was wholly delighted to see again his old friend and
preceptor, and a person who had for so long been virtually his
father-in-law.

Gaston would not come up to the cottage, though, for dinner, because, as
he confessed, he preferred not to encounter Maya. Rather, it was his
wish, and it seemed, indeed, to be his errand, to free Gerald from what
Gaston Bulmer, surprisingly enough, described as the wise woman’s
pernicious magic.

Gerald said: “Oh, bosh! For really now, Gaston, if such nonsense were
not heart-breaking it would be side-splitting. I am inexpressibly
shocked by your hallucination, which is, I trust, of a most transitory
nature. However, let us not discuss my wife, if you please. Instead, do
you tell me how my body is faring.”

So they sat down together under the chestnut-tree. And Gaston Bulmer
answered, “That body, Gerald, since you quitted it, has become a noted
scholar and a man of letters.”

“Ah! ah!” said Gerald, greatly pleased, “so my romance about Dom Manuel
of Poictesme has been completed, and is now being admired everywhere!”

“No, for your body has become, just as I said, a scholar. Scholars do
not write romances.”

“Yet you referred to a man of letters—?”

“Your body is now a rather famous ethnologist. Your body deals with
historical and scientific truths. Your body thus writes large quartos
upon topics to which no romance, howsoever indelicate, could afford to
devote a sentence.”

Gerald fell to stroking that long chin of his. “Still, I recall that the
present informant of my body once informed me there were only two truths
of which any science could be certain.”

“And what were these two truths?”

Gerald named them.

Gaston said then: “The demon is consistent. For these two are precisely
your body’s scientific specialty. To-day your body writes invaluable
books in which the quaint and interesting customs that accompany an
interplay of these two truths, and the various substitutes for that
interplay, are catalogued and explained, as these customs have existed
in all lands and times. Lichfield to-day is wholly proud of the
scholarship and the growing fame of Gerald Musgrave.”

“I am glad that my body has turned out so splendidly. And I trust that
all goes equally well with your daughter Evelyn?”

“Gerald,” the older man replied, looking more seriously troubled than
Gerald ever liked to have anybody seeming in his company, “Gerald, it is
an unfair thing that your Cousin Evelyn, without knowing it, should be
living upon terms of such close friendship with a demon-haunted body.”

“Ah, so that friendship continues!”

“It continues,” said Gaston, “unaltered. It may interest you, Gerald, by
the way, to hear that your Cousin Evelyn has now a son, quite a fine
red-headed boy, born just a year after you relinquished your body to
that treacherous Sylan.”

Gerald answered affably: “Why, that is perfectly splendid! Frank always
wanted a boy.”

“My son-in-law, in fact, is much pleased. It is about my daughter I was
thinking. It seems to me the situation is hardly fair to her, Gerald.”

Gerald replied: “My body is all of me that she was ever acquainted with,
Gaston. So I fail to perceive that anything is altered.”

“Yet, when I reflect that a beautiful and accomplished and chaste
gentlewoman, Gerald—”

“Ah, ah! But, yes, to be sure! you speak in the time-hallowed terms of
Lichfield. And I really do not know why I interrupted you.”

“—When I reflect that, without knowing it, a gentlewoman is living upon
terms of such close friendship with a mere demon-haunted body—”

“And is, in fact, trusting and giving all?”

“All her friendship and the natural affection of a kinswoman. Yes, that
is a sad spectacle. It is an unsuitable spectacle. So it seems to me
your duty as a Musgrave, and as a Southern gentleman, to return
forthwith to mortal living and to your mortal obligations, and in
particular to the obligations of your life-long friendship with your
Cousin Evelyn.”

Gerald said, for the second time, “Oh, bosh!”

For the notions and the chivalrous assumptions of Gaston Bulmer all now
appeared to Gerald out of reason, in view of the divine predestination
which was upon him. A god had no concern with such slight imbroglios as
the code of a merely terrestrial gentleman and the proper maintenance
upon Earth of polite adultery. It would, indeed, be positively ill-bred
for a Dirghic god to meddle with any of the affairs of a planet which,
according to Gerald’s Protestant Episcopal faith, had been created and
was controlled by an Episcopalian deity; for Gerald had of course
retained, provisionally, that religion in which he was a communicant
until he could find out something rather more definite about the
religion in which he was a god.

Gerald therefore said: “My good Gaston, that your meaning is excellent,
I do not doubt. And it is not your fault of course that, in your merely
human condition, you do not quite understand these matters, and
certainly cannot view them with an omniscient eye.”

The older man said: “I understand, in any event, that through all these
years you have stayed here bewitched with terrible half-magics, and that
your own eyes are blinded with the woman’s rose-colored spectacles. And
I seek to preserve you.”

“You would preserve me for the provincial life of your little Lichfield!
You would make me just another chivalrous, bull-headed, rather
nice-looking and wholly stupid Musgrave! In fine, you would urge me to
become genteel and to deny my glorious destiny. Yet to do that would be
cowardly, Gaston: for, whether I like it or not, there is upon me the
divine obligation to fulfil some very ancient prophecies.”

“What sort of prophecies are these?”

“They are Dirghic prophecies. But, then, it is not the language in which
a prophecy is uttered that matters, rather it is—Well, it is the spirit
of the thing! For you must know—although, in view of my wife’s social
position, I have compelled her, after some little argument, to introduce
me hereabouts as a visiting sorcerer,—yet I may tell you, in strict
confidence, Gaston, it is decreed that, as the Lord of the Third Truth,
I am to reign in Antan.”

“And who told you any such unlikely nonsense?”

“Some people that I met upon the road. Oh, quite honest looking people,
Gaston!”

“And who told you that you were the Lord of any Third Truth?”

“There my authority is unimpeachable. For I had it from the lips of a
beautiful and accomplished and chaste gentlewoman, Gaston, who was
speaking with all the frankness begotten by our being in bed together at
the time.”

“And how can you reign in Antan, or anywhere else, when you do not ever
go there? Through all these years, I gather, you have loitered here
within a man’s arm’s reach of Antan!”

Gerald said, with the slight frown of one who finds trouble uncongenial:
“I am puzzled, my dear friend, by your continued references to all these
years. And I admit that various matters have a bit hindered my technical
and merely formal entry into my kingdom. Yet I shall be leaving Mispec
Moor the instant that this week’s washing is in, on Thursday
afternoon—”

“But, my poor Gerald! you will not go, either forward to Antan or back
to Lichfield, on what you think to be next Thursday. You have lost here
all sense of time, you do not even know that the days you have spent in
this place have counted as four years in Lichfield. I tell you that the
wise woman, with her half-magics and her accursed spectacles, holds you
here bewitched. And I now perceive that nothing whatever can be done for
you, who are ensnared by the most fatal of all the magics of the
wrinkled goddess.”

—To which Gerald, for the third time, replied: “Oh, bosh! No sorceress
has any power over a god. And so completely do you misunderstand my
wife, Gaston, that I must tell you hardly a day passes without her
urging me to hurry on to Antan.”

Gaston Bulmer was still regarding him with that extraordinary and wholly
uncalled-for look of compassion.

“How completely,” he remarked, “she understands you Musgraves! Yes, you
are lost, my poor Gerald.”

“—It follows that your notions are preposterous. Oh, that is not your
fault, my dear fellow, and not for an instant am I blaming you. Your
conduct, from your human point of view, is very right, very friendly,
very proper. So your rather laughable blunder does not offend me in the
least. And if, as you declare, I have lingered here for some four years
as you human beings estimate time, what do four years amount to with an
immortal who has at his disposal all eternity? Come now, Gaston, do you
but answer me that very simple question!”

But Gaston answered only: “You are content. You are lost.”




                                  34.
                       Ambiguity of the Brown Man


AND Gaston said no more about the matter, because just here their
talking was interrupted. For now, as these two still sat at the
roadside, they were joined by a brown man, dressed completely in neat
brown, who was journeying toward Antan.

“Hail, friend!” said Gerald, “and what business draws you to the city of
all marvels?”

And the brown man, pausing, said that, in point of fact, it was upon a
slight matter of business routine that he desired to consult with Queen
Freydis. All gods, he said, had rather speedily passed downward to
encounter the word which was in the beginning,—for it was thus that the
brown man spoke, very much as King Solomon had spoken,—all gods, that
is, save only one, who so bewilderingly altered his tenets that there
was no telling where to have him.

The brown man thought that, nowadays, in a comparatively enlightened
nineteenth century, was perhaps the appropriate time for something to be
done about this celestial chameleon. And in any case, he said yet
further, he always enjoyed his little conferences with Freydis, who was
rather a dear—

“So, so!” said Gerald, “you, sir, have previously visited Antan?”

“Oh, very often. For I am the adversary of all the gods of men.”

And Gerald viewed with natural interest the one person who pretended to
know at first-hand anything about Gerald’s appointed kingdom: yet, even
so, if this brown gentleman, as Gerald had begun to suspect, happened to
be the Father of All Lies, there was no real point to questioning him,
inasmuch as you could believe none of his answers.

“—For, I infer,” said Gerald, “that you who travel on the road of gods
and myths are that myth not unfamiliar to my Protestant Episcopal
rearing; and that I have now the privilege, so frequently anticipated
for me by my nearer relatives, of addressing the devil?”

“I retain of course in every mythology, including the Semitic, my
niche,” replied the brown man, “from which to speak to intelligent
persons in somewhat varying voices.”

Then Gaston Bulmer arose, and the aging adept shaped a sign which to
Gerald was unfamiliar.

“I suspect, sir,” said Gaston Bulmer, “that my mother’s father, who was
called Florian de Puysange, once heard the speaking of that voice.”

“It is a tenable hypothesis. I in my day have spoken much.”

“—As did, I believe, yet another forebear of mine, the great Jurgen,
from whom descends the race of Puysange, and who once encountered
someone rather like you in a Druid wood—”

“I cannot deny it. The Druids also knew me. I, who am the Prince of this
world, meet however, as you will readily understand, so many millions of
people during the course of my efforts to keep them contented with my
kingdom that it is not always possible for me to recollect every one of
my beneficiaries.”

“Still,” Gerald said, “you have played in large historical events a
strange high part; you have known all the very best people: and you must
have much of interest to tell me about. You, sir, at least shall dine
with me, since my friend here is obdurate. My wife avoids the usual run
of gods, but to devils I have never heard her voice the slightest
objection. So, if you will do me the honor to accompany me to my
temporary home, in that cottage—”

But the brown man smiled. And he excused himself.

“For your wife and I are not wholly strangers. And the circumstances in
which we last parted were, I confess, a bit awkward. So I really believe
it would be more pleasant, for everyone concerned, for me not to meet
your wife just now. Do you present, none the less, my compliments.”

“And whose compliments shall I tell her that they are?”

“Do you say a friend of her earliest youth passed by, one somewhat
intimately known to her before she first became a mother; and I make no
doubt that Havvah will understand.”

“But my wife’s married name is Maya, and before our marriage it was
Æsred—”

“Ah, yes!” the brown man said, precisely as Glaum had done, “women do
vary in their given names. Do you present my compliments, then, to your
wife: for that word, by and by, means the same thing to every husband.”

“I will convey the message,” Gerald promised: “but the aphorism I would
prefer to have delivered by somebody else.”

And he so parted with both his guests.

For Gaston Bulmer embraced Gerald and then went sorrowfully back to
Lichfield, in a cloud which the aging adept’s despondency made quite
black: and the brown man leisurely strolled on toward Antan, with the
ease of one who was well used to walking to and fro about the earth.

He did not hurry, nor did he look inquisitively about him, Gerald
noticed, as has done the other travelers toward the city of all marvels.
The brown man, alone of the many that had passed toward Antan, appeared
to travel upon a road with which he was thoroughly acquainted, toward a
familiar goal.




                                  35.
                      Of Kalki and a Döppelganger


SO IT was that Gerald stayed yet a while longer upon Mispec Moor. July
passed uneventfully. Each pleasant summer day found Gerald sitting
beneath his chestnut-tree at the roadside: and he talked there with many
wayfarers who have no part in this tale. For almost all these travelers
told the same story. Nine out of every ten of them had yesterday been a
god whom human beings served; each had been worshipped by mankind in one
or another quarter of the world: to-day their human concerns were over,
and they journeyed toward the goal of all the gods. What did they look
to find there? Gerald would ask: and—to this very simple
question,—every one of them replied evasively. They went to hear that
word which was in the beginning, and which would be after everything
else had perished, that word which was unknown to all the gods of men.
They would say no more: and Gerald did not deeply bother about the
matter, because he was nowadays quite well contented, and when he went
to Antan would soon be clearing up every mystery for himself.

And the divine steed Kalki also appeared content enough, nor was his
aspect altered by inaction. The horse retained that uniform strange
shining and that metallic glitter which made him seem actually to be
made of untarnished silver. Of course when you saw him grazing upon
Mispec Moor just after a rain-shower his back would be dark and sleek,
and his broad sides would be streaked with wavering, oily-looking bands.
But at all other times he kept his glowing silver color, which was
unlike that of any other horse Gerald had ever seen.

Meanwhile the divine steed grazed with the geldings who once had been
the human lovers of Maya. He went as they did, lifting each hoof with
somewhat droll carefulness as he grazed forward on the sloping ground
about the cottage. For Gerald would often watch this grazing. And to him
these horses as they moved slowly and irregularly windward seemed
continually to pick up and to replace their hoofs upon the ground as
though they believed each hoof to be a rather fragile parcel. The
pendulous, stretched, heavy necks of these horses, each neck staying
always monotonously parallel to all the other necks, appeared to him too
heavy ever again to be lifted erect. To wonder in the drowsy summer
afternoon how this lifting could possibly be achieved aroused an
unpleasant sensation in Gerald’s collarbone.

So Kalki fed all day among the geldings, and on windy nights he huddled
with them in the lee of the cottage. Each day Kalki went looking
downward, grazing interminably, and without ever ceasing to move those
wobbling, dark, prehensile, rotatory, snuffling lips as the divine steed
fed upon the sparse grass of Mispec Moor. He, just as greedily as the
geldings, would contort his lips and twist his head when he attempted to
get at the longer and more luscious grass which grew almost inaccessibly
about the fence posts. And to reflection there was something of the
incongruous in the spectacle of a divine steed engrossed by this
problem.

Now and again, as Gerald noted also, the stallion would raise his superb
head, and Kalki would look almost wistfully toward Antan. But soon he
would be back at his grazing: and, upon the whole, he seemed content
enough with the pleasures appropriate to ordinary horses. And Gerald
thought too that, nowadays, Kalki looked less often toward the goal of
all the gods.

Yet Kalki turned out to be not wholly unique. For, one morning, as
Gerald went toward his chestnut-tree, he noted the approach from afar of
a traveler who rode upon a horse that had very much the appearance of
Kalki. And when Gerald had reached the roadway he saw that the newcomer
was in fact mounted upon a steed which might well have been Kalki’s
twin.

“Hail, friend!” said Gerald, “And what business draws you to the city of
all marvels?”

Then a regrettable thing happened; for the young horseman pretended not
to have heard Gerald, and as the boy passed he looked investigatively
about Mispec Moor, and he pretended not to have seen Gerald, who stood
within a few feet of him.

He was a notably handsome boy, too, in a blue coat and a golden yellow
waistcoat, with a tall white stock and ruffles about his throat. His
hair seemed red: and Gerald noted, moreover, the lazy and mildly
humorous, half-mocking gaze with which this boy regarded Mispec Moor, as
he rode by unhurriedly toward Antan, without any pausing, and Gerald
noted in particular the very lovely smiling of this boy’s so amply
curved and rather womanish mouth, as the boy went by upon the horse
which was astonishingly like Kalki.

Yes, he had quite the air of a gentleman: and it was a great pity that
this young whippersnapper had not the manners of a gentleman also,
Gerald reflected, as Gerald stood there, feeling unwarrantably snubbed,
and blinking behind his rose-colored spectacles.




                                  36.
                       Tannhäuser’s Troubled Eyes


AND upon yet another day Gerald talked with the comely but now aged
knight Tannhäuser, as this famous myth passed by, in full armor, upon
his journey into Antan.

“There,” said Tannhäuser, “there I may find again, it may be, the fair
Dame Venus and all the brave and high-hearted sinners who would not
compromise with the narrow and cruel ways of respectable persons.”

“My friend,” said Gerald, mildly, “there is considerable virtue to be
found, here and there, among respectable persons. There is even a virtue
in compromise.”

And Tannhäuser shouted: “That I deny! All my life denies that, and so
long as my name lives I am that lie’s denial! For it was the good and
the respectable who betrayed me. I found pride and worldliness and a
lack of cordiality to exist among the bourgeoisie and even among those
professional churchmen who should have been the first to sustain and
guide a repentant sinner. And so I turned again to that frankly pagan
beauty which is hateful to pious and small-minded persons.”

Then this resplendent gray-haired myth spoke heatedly of his own life
history and of how his love for this frankly pagan beauty had led him
into the hollow mountain called the Hörselberg, to live there as the
lover of Dame Venus in all manner of frankly pagan pleasure-seeking; and
of how, after seven years of frankly pagan recreations, when repentance
smote him, abetted by the frailties of middle age, it was among the
leading church members, and in the heart of the very head of the church,
that he had found no sympathy. Therefore Tannhäuser was returning to
those frankly pagan recreations, so far at least as they were consistent
with late middle life, because he was disgusted by those whining and
hypocritical, cruel church members.

And Gerald listened. He remembered how in the Mirror of Caer Omn he for
a while had been Tannhäuser. Yet it was a queer thing, and a
circumstance which made Gerald suspect time to be changing him, somehow,
who used to be such a tremendous iconoclast, that now this old
rebellious myth,—which represented yet another of Gerald’s discarded
personalities,—appeared to Gerald remarkably over-colored and rather
pitiably foolish. For here was a story which led to wrong conclusions.
It ended by depicting a god at loggerheads with the head of his own
church: and it begot, somewhat inevitably, those loud sneers at the
bourgeois virtues, and those denunciations of people who, after all, had
done nothing worse than to live quiet and common-sense lives which
Tannhäuser was now declaiming, and which to Gerald appeared unutterably
childish. There was no conceivable reason why a well-thought-of pope
should be hobnobbing with and coddling a broken-down old lecher just
come out of a superior brothel. In fact, in reproving Pope Urban so
publicly, Heaven had been, to Gerald’s finding, rather tactless, and had
violated the _esprit de corps_ which ought to be preserved among the
fellow workers in every church. And in any case, Tannhäuser’s present
reflections upon religion were not such as Gerald, now that he had
become a god, could listen to with approval.

Still, Gerald did listen: and Gerald smiled, friendlily enough.

“I know, I know!” said Gerald. “I know, friend, all about you. When you
repented of evil-doing,—and, really, you did take your time about
that,—then you turned hopefully to religion, but, alas! you were
repelled by its ministers. You found them to be human beings subject to
human frailties. You found that—in Heaven’s eyes, anyhow,—even a pope
might make a mistake. And so, quite naturally, you proceeded to drown
the surprise and horror awakened by this discovery in out-and-out
debauchery and in cutting reflections upon all pew-renters. For your
discovery was revolutionary; no doubt the stars were shaken in their
courses, to observe a human being making a mistake; and you also must
have found the spectacle extremely trying. Still, you in this way became
useful to romantic art.”

Then Gerald said: “Lord, man, but what a following you have had! and
what a number of people have got harmless pleasure out of developing the
discovery which Tannhäuser first made, that inconsistency and
mean-spiritedness may be found among the clergy and the churchgoers! You
will thus continue to be a benefactor of your kind for centuries, I have
not a doubt. Yet I sometimes fancy that inconsistency and
mean-spiritedness may be found even among recognizedly depraved persons
who do not go to any church at all. I find that every religion cows a
number of its devotees into a thrifty-minded practice of generally
beneficent virtues. The average of desirable qualities in the
congregation of every church appears to me, after all, quite perceptibly
higher than is that average among the regular customers of any brothel
or the clients of the public hangman. I do not deny that my discovery
also is, from any æsthetic standpoint, revolutionary. I confess that it
is nowhere represented in romance, as yet, and that no conceivable
realist can ever regard such a grotesque fancy with anything save
loathing. But I believe that some day an intrepid handling of this
daring theme will prodigally repay some very great innovator, and will
become useful to romantic art.”

And Gerald said also: “Moreover, you remain quite invaluable as a
pretext and a palliation whenever youth hungers for its fling. Only, I
must dare point out, my dear sir, that your second century-long fling
was, by the best people, unavoidably, felt to be excessive. All of us,
more or less, have had our flings: even so, a fling needs to be
conducted, and above all to be wound up, with some discretion. It ought
to be high-hearted and lyrical in every feature: it ought especially to
have the briefness of the lyric. And it ought not, no, it really ought
not, to wind up in the Hörselberg. Now I, too, my friend, for example,
have had my fling. But I have had it in a quiet, self-controlled and
gentlemanly way, without overdoing the thing. Thereafter I settled
down,—just temporarily, to be sure, but still I have settled down,—in
no lewd and feverish Hörselberg, but here, where a contented husband
risks no further chance of becoming useful to romantic art.”

“It is possible for one to exist, but not for anybody to live, here!”
replied Tannhäuser, scornfully, as his wild gaze swept over the still
stretches of Mispec Moor.

“Allow me!” said Gerald, with the tiniest of smiles; and he perched his
rose-colored spectacles upon the beaked high nose of Tannhäuser.

There was a pause. And Tannhäuser sighed.

“I see,” said the knight then, “a quiet little home of your own, in the
country, with your wife and with the kiddies, too, I daresay. And with
fresh vegetables, of course, right out of your own garden.”

“In just such a home, Messire Tannhäuser, as is the cornerstone of every
nation, the cradle of all the virtues, and the guiding-star of I forget
precisely what. It is also the brightest jewel in the crown of something
or other, and it assists other desirable abstractions in the capacity of
a bulwark, a spur, and an anchor. It is, you may depend upon it, the
proper place in which to end one’s fling.”

“And I! I might, if only I had married that dear fine sweet girl
Elizabeth, I, too, might have had such a home! For, after all, there is
nothing like marriage and the love of a good woman. An endless round of
perpetual pleasure-seeking rings hollow by and by, and one hungers for
the simple sacred joys of home-life. I must, oh, very decidedly, I must
settle down. I, too, must have just such a home as this.”

But the thought of all which he had been missing so affected Tannhäuser
that he took off the spectacles and unaffectedly wiped his eyes. After
that the aging, comely knight sat for a while silent and rather
frightened looking. He stared again at the cottage and at the moor, and
then he stared at Gerald.

“And you live in this hole, with a muddy brat and a dull-witted,
middle-aged, not at all good-looking woman for your only company! I
marvel at the enchantment which controls you. At least Dame Venus held
me with an intelligible sort of sorcery.”

“That,” Gerald replied, as he contentedly put on his rose-colored
spectacles again, “is nonsense.”

“It is a very dreadful nonsense. It is a soul-destroying and besotting
nonsense, from which I flee to look for the less terrible enchantments
of the Hörselberg.”

Then Gerald put his question. “You, who have traveled through the
Marches of Antan, wherein only two truths endure, and the one teaching
is that we copulate and die,—do you not look to find in the goal of all
the gods some third truth?”

But the comely knight seemed not to have heard this question, in his
frank terror of domesticity. Tannhäuser had mounted his horse, and he
now rode galloping like a madman toward Antan.




                                  37.
                     Contentment of the Mislaid God


NOW life contented Gerald as he lived it through this recognized
parenthesis in his divine career. Very soon this little episode of his
stay upon Mispec Moor would be ended: it would even be forgotten,
perhaps, in the press of regal and superhuman affairs. Meanwhile he
lived in quite tolerable ease. He had nothing to trouble him. Hardly a
morning passed without his finding some more or less interesting
celestial outcast to talk to under his chestnut-tree. Maya continued to
be an excellent cook, in her plain, unpretentious way: and she saw to it
that the cottage was kept comfortable and efficient in all appointments.

And Maya was dear to him. She nowadays found fault with virtually
everything that Gerald did. And whenever he ventured any suggestion, as
to Theodorick or the economics of the cottage or their social
engagements in Turoine,—or even if Gerald as much as suggested opening
or closing a window,—Maya at once produced at least nine grounds upon
which the suggestion was plainly very foolish and would never have
occurred to anyone of real intelligence. And she cherished the most
imaginative views as to the extent of Gerald’s selfishness and lack of
consideration for other people, and of his habit of never doing anything
whatever for her pleasure.

Sometimes, though, she would go for as much as an hour without dwelling,
at especial length, upon what a trial Gerald was to her in one way or
another. And in all respects she was a capable woman who made him an
excellent wife, and treated him far better than she could have found any
excuse for doing in what she said about him.

And Gerald loved Theodorick Quentin Musgrave, also, with an affection
which rather troubled Gerald. The child, he knew, displayed no
extraordinary charm nor talent: no course of reasoning could justify any
extreme fondness for Theodorick upon the ground of his physical or
mental gifts. Theodorick Quentin Musgrave was not brilliant, he was not
lovely, he was not especially amiable: he was, indeed, by way of being a
particularly selfish small tyrant, continually adding to the disorder of
the cottage, to the dismay of Gerald’s finicky liking for neatness, and
continually devising unneeded trouble and commandeering manual tasks
from his parents because of the droll pleasure which Theodorick appeared
to derive from seeing his parents fetch and carry in his service.

Yet, whensoever Gerald put his arm about the small, warm, yielding,
sturdy, but so helpless body, it was as though Gerald’s own body were
melting in a grateful glow of what was—bewilderingly—a sort of panic
terror. He loved this freckled, fragile creature with an unwisdom which
was, as Gerald knew, an assuredness of more or less future discomfort
and, it well might be, of anguish, for him who quite honestly disliked
trouble of any kind. Since this child had been created, Gerald’s
well-being was not any longer a matter which Gerald could hope to
control or even to protect: his happiness was now risked upon what might
befall this imp. It was the helplessness of the child which frightened
Gerald with a sense of his own helplessness. Life was so cruel to
children. Life damaged and hurt children in so many ways inevitably. And
every hurt to this child, now, would be an anguish to Gerald, who could
avoid none of them. He could not even manage to get the child properly
christened, in this neighborhood so profuse in sorcerers and wizards,
who used, as everybody knew, unchristened children in horrible ways
which it was not comfortable to think about....

Then, too, Gerald was not certain Theodorick Quentin Musgrave was real.
Gerald remembered always, at the back of his mind, that frightful
instant when he had removed his spectacles, to find the child had
vanished. Gerald assured himself that the cause was a slight
indigestion, and that the moment’s blur of vision came from a disordered
stomach. But he was wholly careful not ever again to look at Theodorick
except through the rose-colored spectacles which made visible the magics
of Maya. He kept resolutely out of his full attention the fact that
Theodorick might be an illusion which Maya had created. And he grew
accustomed to that unusual milk-colored tongue, which showed like a
white snake within the red moist little mouth whenever the child
laughed.

And Gerald sometimes wondered if Maya had over-ambitiously designed to
make permanent this mere parenthesis in his career. She had attempted,
to be sure, no magic such as that with which she had transformed his
predecessors. No sorceress would dare, for that matter, thus to presume
against a god.... Gerald knew that, instead, it was his Maya’s wholesome
simplicity and the prosaic human comfort which he did get, after all,
from living with this middle-aged and fault-finding and not in the least
beautiful woman that had detained him, just for the while of this
parenthesis in his career. He of course would pass on, to enter into his
kingdom, by and by. And there was no conceivable hurry about it, now
that his journeying to Antan was for every practical purpose finished,
and now that whensoever he elected he might within the next half-hour or
so be taking over the realm and all the powers of the Master
Philologist.

Meanwhile, though, Gerald would now and then wonder amusedly if his
dear, stupid Maya could perhaps have struck upon the device of detaining
him by not using any magic whatever: if she in secret flattered herself
that this device was succeeding: and if she actually cherished the
delusion that she was hoodwinking omniscient Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper
and Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, the Well-beloved of Heavenly
Ones?

Anyhow, his life here very amiably contented him for the while. The
local circles of sorcerers and wizards were pleasant enough, barring
only that haunting memory as to how they used unchristened children.
Gerald and Maya did not go out a great deal; but they were on friendly
terms with the neighbors; they attended an occasional Sabbat; and they
kept in touch generally with the affairs of Turoine. And for the rest,
the little happenings of his home life temporarily contented the Lord of
the Third Truth.

And he began to reflect that, just possibly, Antan might be to him,
after he had entered into his kingdom, a disappointment. From here Antan
seemed uniformly wonderful. It was astonishingly pleasant to sit upon
the western porch of the small cottage, especially toward evening, when
your shoes propped up before you on the porch railing reflected a
pinkish glow from the sunset, and to imagine what was going on in that
broad expanse of yet unvisited fields and hills which now were turning
into gray and purple mists directly beneath the gold and crimson of the
sunset. The trouble was that you, who were gifted with the imagination
of a god, were very certainly imagining more wonderful happenings for
that mysterious theatre than could by any chance be enacted there.

For one matter, after dark, Antan always displayed eight lights, six of
them grouped together in the middle of the vista with the general effect
of a cross, and the other two showing much farther off to the northwest.
About those never-varying huge lights Gerald had formed at least twenty
delightful theories, all plausible as long as you remained upon Mispec
Moor, whereas if you went to Antan not more at most than one of these
theories could prove true.

To go to Antan thus meant the destruction of no less than nineteen
rather beautiful ideas as to those lights alone. However, Gerald felt,
there was no help for this: and he whole-heartedly meant to take over
his appointed kingdom without any unpleasant criticizing, no matter what
might be the deficiencies of the place, by and by. Meanwhile, there was
no great hurry: and it was, indeed, a prudent and long-sighted course
for him to be pausing here to enjoy these fine scenic effects, because
by and by he would not ever again be seeing Antan from this distance.

After nightfall those eight lights never varied. But by day there was
always a different and, as it seemed, a more lovely display of rounded,
parti-colored, cleared hills, which here and there were darklier
streaked, no doubt with orchards. Beyond them many flat-topped mountains
showed, yet farther to the west, like a sleeping herd of gigantic blue
crocodiles all couched across the west and facing north. And above so
much terrestrial graciousness moved an incessant pageant of clouds, not
a bit like the flat clouds which you looked up at from Lichfield,
because the clouds which brooded over Antan were seen, from Gerald’s
station upon Mispec Moor, as on a level with you: and, when they were
thus considered sidewise, they resembled moving walls and crags and
drifting curtains through which the sunlight smote in slanting and huge
and pallid and quite tangible looking shafts.

Always, too, you noticed, nowadays, that vast and violet-shrouded,
high-breasted woman’s figure lying yonder, motionless, with that
ever-burning heart; and you were visited by an odd fancy. You fancied
that Queen Freydis, the as yet unwon-to queen of your appointed kingdom,
was like that woman. And this fancy came to you none the less often
because of your plain perception of its illogic.

“Come, now!” said Gerald, “a mistress of that size would be unsuitable.
Charms of so diffuse an acreage would create, even in a god, a sense of
inadequacy. Nevertheless, I am falling rather ardently in love with
those two hills. I begin to adore the casual play of lights and shadows
upon yonder piled-up dirt, which when seen from any other station than
this would not in the least resemble a woman. And such amorous notions,
apart from their insanity, are not befitting in a contentedly, if
temporarily, married person.”

The transience of his comforts made them very dear. It was well worth
the inconvenience of sleeping in his spectacles (as Gerald, for his own
reasons, did) so that in the night season he could awaken, to see Maya’s
tranquil brown head yonder beside the smaller and tousled and livelily
red head of Theodorick Quentin Musgrave,—both visible yonder because of
the lamp which the child demanded at night, and because of his
insistence that Mother was to sleep with him instead of with Father.

Outside, Gerald would hear those of his transformed predecessors who now
were horses, shuffling and restively stamping, and at times snorting and
whinnying, in the chill outer darkness; or a misguided gentleman who
lived nowadays as a steer would low, much farther off; or Gerald would
hear yet another one of Maya’s former husbands coughing, with the
far-reaching and morose scornfulness peculiar to a sheep. And then the
difference between the estate of Gerald’s predecessors and the snug
warmth of his so comfortable soft bed, and his knowledge of that
unmarred bodily ease which, just now, was his through every hour of the
day, would trouble Gerald, because he knew it all to be so satisfying
and so transient.




                               PART TEN
                          THE BOOK OF ENDINGS

                     “Trust Nobody but Thyself, and
                     None Other will Betray Thee.”




                                  38.
                       About the Past of a Bishop


SO GERALD stayed content enough, all through those pleasant summer
days. It was odd to reflect that these days were counting as he did not
know how many years in Lichfield. He would now and then contrast himself
with his great ancestor Dom Manuel, the same about whom, in that quaint
far-off time when Gerald had believed himself merely human, and was
interested in such human nonsense, Gerald had intended to write a
romance,—because the Redeemer of Poictesme, as Gerald remembered it,
had passed a month with the wood demon Béda, in the forest of Dun
Vlechlan, where the company consisted entirely of evil principles, and
where the passing of each day left Manuel a year older.

Gerald would reflect how much more sensible and pleasant was the course
which he was following, surrounded with every domestic virtue, where the
days did not count at all. For Gerald was content, and certainly he had
grown no older in body. He had become used to living upon Mispec Moor:
he wondered sometimes if Antan could afford any splendor which he
personally would find more to his taste; and he felt that he would
honestly miss the simple wholesome ways of Maya’s log and plaster
cottage after he had entered forever into the red-pillared palace of his
kingdom beyond good and evil,—next week, perhaps, or at all events not
later than September.

And it stayed diverting to observe those persons who almost every day
passed beyond Mispec Moor in their journeying toward the goal of all the
gods of men. Then by and by one of these wayfarers turned out to be a
stalwart, white-bearded old gentleman dressed as a bishop. And the sight
of him delighted Gerald: for here at last was somebody who could
properly christen Theodorick Quentin Musgrave.

Meanwhile this traveler was asking hospitality of Maya. She, who
disliked travelers, prepared the white and tender flesh of a calf, she
kneaded cakes of fine meal and baked them upon the hearth, she fetched
milk and butter. All these she set before the seeming bishop upon the
front porch of her cottage quite affably. For this old gentleman, it
appeared, had known Maya of the Fair Breasts a great while ago, at the
very beginning of a career confessedly so populous in husbands that
Gerald always felt a certain delicacy in asking questions about it.

“But there was never any reasoning with you, my dear,” said the old
gentleman, as they all ate amicably together upon the porch. “So you
eluded my purpose, and you preferred to content that first man of yours
for his loss of the over-wilful beauty and the rebellious wisdom of your
predecessor—”

Maya replied: “I do wish you would try just one more of those cakes, for
I made them myself, exactly as you used to like them in the plains of
Mamrê, when you were up to your nonsense with Sarah. Yes, I believe that
a girl, a really nice girl, that is, should keep her caresses for her
husband. Oh, I am casting no reflections upon either of your
sweethearts. It is a matter every woman must decide for herself. I
merely say that, for my part, I think a love-affair with a god while he
is still in power is ostentatious and can only end in unhappiness—”

“But—!” Gerald had begun indignantly.

She patted his hand. “No, Gerald, I did not mean you. Your power is
limitless, and you are quite different from all other gods, and nobody
knows that better than I do. So please do not start any pouting while we
have company! He thinks that he is a god, too,” Maya then stated,
casually, to her visitor. “That is why his feelings are upset. He
believes he is the Fair-haired Hoodoo, the Yelper and the Pretender, or
something of that sort. As for that woman, Adam was very lucky to get
rid of her.”

“I wonder,” said the white-bearded gentleman, smiling reminiscently, “I
wonder if he always thought so?”

“My dear old friend! but you and I know quite well what the creatures
are! Of course he cherished the memory of her for the rest of his life,
long after the worthless piece had gone, just literally, to the devil.
She was not bad looking: that much, anyhow, one can say in her favor:
and so the poor fellow had always his memories of that beauty which he
had known, once. He used to say it was too lovely to be retained by any
man. And I agreed with him. No man had the least chance, with infernal
connoisseurs about.... And his sons,” said Maya, as she reflectively
scratched at her nose, “have, somehow, all preserved that memory. There
is no one of them but now and then finds my daughters rather inadequate,
and half remembers that woman and gets lackadaisical over her. It is
just another thing about the creatures which my daughters have to put up
with.”

“She too is yonder, they tell me,”—and the old gentleman nodded toward
Antan. Then he continued: “And I suspect there is no one of your
daughters but is jealous of this ever-living memory of that Lilith who
stays always the first, never quite forgotten love of every son of Adam;
and who prevents more of them than you would care to acknowledge, my
dear, from ever utterly giving over their hearts to any of your
daughters.”

“We are jealous, within limits,” Maya replied, in the while that she
hospitably refilled his glass with fresh milk. “No woman likes playing
second fiddle, even in the moonstruck brain of a poet. Yet my daughters
know it does no real harm. And if men were not up to something, they
would be up to something else. Besides, it gives them their nonsense to
be romantic over in private, without pestering their poor sweethearts,
and their wives too at first, to be romantic along with them, which is a
thing no nice woman really feels comfortable about—”

But the old gentleman had sighed. “You touch upon a somewhat harrowing
subject. For I fancy that no other luckless being has ever had to cater
to the shifting needs of popular romance so arduously or so variously as
I.”

And Maya now was beaming upon him quite fondly. “Yes, but how clever you
have been about it! In fact, I suppose that nobody anywhere has ever had
a more wonderful career than yours. And it seems only yesterday—does it
not?—that we were all young together in the Garden, and your reputation
was merely local. But you Jews are so adaptable!”

“I was not even a Jew, my dear, to begin with. Perhaps that is why I
never quite got on with them. I was a storm deity of the Midianites. But
the Jews kidnapped me, in some way or another, when I was just a godling
playing happily with my thunderbolts upon the flanks of Sinai.”

“Even so, when I think of what a position you have attained in the best
Christian circles, and of the perfect respectability of the church to
which you now belong, and of all the splendid poetry you have inspired,
and of how generally famous you have become everywhere, I am wholly
proud that you once, when we were both younger”—and Gerald saw that
Maya had colored up rather prettily,—“had other plans for me.”

“You,” said the old gentleman,—who, as Gerald now observed, was really
quite Jewish looking,—“were the first of my disappointments. Yes, I
suppose that in many respects my career has been unusual. Yet it has
ended by placing me in a most awkward position: and nothing ever turned
out in accordance with my plans, somehow.”

Then the stalwart, white-bearded old gentleman who was dressed as a
bishop spoke of his first family, and of how his descendants through a
son named Isaac went astray. He spoke of his efforts to retain the
affection of his family, through the vigorous methods appropriate to a
storm god. But nothing had seemed to avail. There had been fine plagues
and deluges and captivities and decimations and devastating miracles by
the score. He had sent the swords of Babylon and of Philistia and of
dozens of other kingdoms to slay them, and huge dogs to tear their
corpses, and many birds of prey and all the wild beasts of earth to
devour and to destroy them, without arousing one ray of real affection.
He had laid waste their cities; he had made their widows as the sands of
the sea; he had starved them, and had smitten them with leprosy, and had
burned them with lightnings; he had afflicted them with the most voluble
and pessimistic prophets: he had, in a word, done absolutely everything
he could think of as likely to requicken their waning affection. But the
more he annoyed his descendants, the less they had seemed really to love
him. Upon the heels of every warning, and immediately after each
paternal correction, the survivors of it seemed only the more inclined
to prefer some other patron: and it was all very discouraging.

And of his second son he spoke also. Here he became remarkably vague,
and he talked as if muddled by the whole affair. There had been a great
sacrifice and an atonement, the workings of which the old gentleman
could not pretend to understand. He could not yet say just who had been
put in a more amiable frame of mind by that atonement, since personally
he imagined any father would have found it most distasteful and
upsetting. Anyhow, the affair had resulted in a church with which he had
felt it rather his duty to associate himself. And, awkwardly enough,
after he had thus been persuaded by them formally to commit himself to a
policy of peace and forgiveness and general loving-kindness, his
incomprehensible servants had gone on squabbling and murdering, only
much more often than before, because now they did it on high moral
grounds. They had fought over transubstantiation, and over Greek
diphthongs, and over the respective merits of complete and frontal
baptism, and over infant damnation, and over redemption through faith
alone, and over a number of other recondite matters which no Arabian
storm god, very simply reared in the country during the really formative
years of his life, and with no regular academic training, could well be
expected to understand: and it was all very discouraging.

Nor to-day was his position much happier. He found himself ranked rather
high in the church with which he was associated professionally. Yes, the
old gentleman admitted, with plain bewilderment, his name was honored.
But all his actions—even such quite notable actions as holding a
conference with his disciples in a fiery furnace, and affording his
messengers inter-urban transportation by means of a whale, and of
causing the sun itself to stand still,—all these fine exploits, along
with his every natural exhibition of the irascibility and truculence
appropriate to a storm god, had been reduced to poetic inventions. His
very existence had been complicated with a triplicity which, since the
mind could not grasp it, prevented his existence from being, actually,
believed in by anybody. That had seemed, from the first moment he heard
of it, a doctrine a bit difficult for him personally to accept, after
having been an undivided deity in regular practice for so many thousands
of years. And eighteen centuries of pondering upon that doctrine of his
triune nature, to which he was through his official position committed,
had showed a matter so abstruse and puzzling to be far beyond the
comprehension of any country-bred Arabian storm god, howsoever
faithfully he had broadened his mind, at the courts of various Christian
monarchs and in the larger nunneries, since the commencement of his
religious training among the farming element of Seir and Sinai. Nor
could he honestly say that he had ever been able to take quite kindly to
the notion that his being was confessedly a mystery not to be understood
by prelates graduated from the best seminaries, and that his actions
were all poetic inventions. For that left of him, so far as could be
seen by a plain-thinking Arabian storm god, nothing which the human mind
could grasp as an actuality; it made every one of his really
thorough-going servants who accepted utterly the teachings of his
church, so far as he could infer, a devotee of vacuousness: and it was
all very discouraging.

“Altogether,” said the old gentleman who was dressed as a bishop, “I
feel that my present ranking in the Christian church is a perplexing
and, in some sense, a false position for an Arabian storm god. I have
aged under it. Oh, I have tried to be quite fair about the matter.
Sometimes I even go so far as to concede that people who have never met
a particular person might, just possibly, believe that person to be
three persons whose actions were all poetic inventions. The human
imagination is vigorous. I must point out to you, though, my friends,
that nobody could conceivably believe that about himself. These very
curious theories about me thus postulate the existence of at least one
sceptic, and they hinge indeed upon the existence of that sceptic, in
me. Now, I feel instinctively there must be an error in any such logic.
I feel it unfair that I alone of all the persons connected with my
church should be inevitably doomed to remain an atheist. And I have aged
steadily under the injustice and unreason of it all. Otherwise, if I yet
retained the vigor of my youth, I might yet, in my frank way, attempt to
clean the slate, as it were, with whirlwinds and thunderbolts and
another deluge or so, and to make a fresh start all around. But, alas, I
have aged, my dear Havvah, since the days of our first acquaintance. The
inexplicable theology and the rationalization, as they call it, to which
I have been subjected by my incomprehensible servants, now for some
eighteen centuries with ever increasing rigor, have brought me to the
point that I cannot logically believe in my own existence. The things
they tell me simply do not hold together. And so—”

He comprehensively waved his hand toward Antan.

But Gerald rose, and Gerald put aside his glass of milk and his veal
sandwich.

And Gerald said, beamingly: “You who have traveled through the Marches
of Antan, wherein only two truths endure, and the one teaching is that
we copulate and die,—you at least, I know, must, as a leading official
of the Protestant Episcopal church, look confidently forward to finding
in the goal of all the gods a third truth. The fact emboldens me to ask
that you do but answer me this very simple question—”

“Alas, my friend,” the badgered looking old gentleman broke in,
“professionally, of course, my faith is all that it should be. But in my
private capacity, as a plain-thinking Arabian storm god, now that I am
retiring from active churchwork, I suspect that when anybody anywhere
once understands the nature of any two truths, that will be quite time
enough for him to be requiring a third truth to exercise his wits upon.”

“That truism, sir, is not to be denied,” said Gerald, rather
crestfallen. “Yet that is likewise an evasion.”

“In fact,” said the bewildered old gentleman, shaking sadly his white
head, “in fact, ever since I acquired triplicity, I have been accused of
duplicity also. The Gnostics, I remember, said very unkind things about
that: the Valentinians were no more charitable: whereas I would really
hesitate to repeat, my friends, the remarks of the Priscillianists.”

“—And in any case,” Gerald said, emphatically, “howsoever you may evade
me, it would not do for you to evade your duties to the Protestant
Episcopal church. The world as yet has need of bishops and of all that
they signify. I must point out to you, sir, that the wild talking of
bishops yet frightens many persons into a thrifty-minded practice of
generally beneficent virtues. Indeed, sir, bishops remind me rather of
calomel in the effect which they have upon the run of men, because I
find their effect also to be, ultimately, beneficial. There are also
other points of resemblance. And if the strange ways of episcopal action
now and then unavoidably upset you, sir, you ought to remember that it
is, after all, for the general good. I, moreover, must point out that it
absolutely would not do for you to go into Antan and be one of my
subjects—”

“He thinks,” Maya once more explained, parenthetically, to her guest,
“that he is a god, you understand.”

“But I am!” said Gerald. “These continual interruptions are really very
awkward, my dear. And the present situation also is awkward, in view of
my Protestant Episcopal upbringing. It is a situation which must at any
cost be avoided. This gentleman simply must not go into Antan.”

“But what is to be done about it?”

“Oh, do you not be uneasy! Your age, sir, and its attendant delusions,
such as wanting to go into Antan, are matters quite easily remedied by
any competent Dirghic deity. You could not possibly have pursued a wiser
course than to come to me for assistance. So, if you will permit me,
sir—”

Thereafter Gerald, still in something of a flutter, baptized the old
gentleman who was dressed as a bishop with the last remaining drop of
water from the Churning of the Ocean.




                                  39.
                         Baptism of a Musgrave


FORTHWITH the old white-bearded gentleman became a most personable
looking youngish Oriental, who shone with a fiery radiance, and about
whose head played a continual flashing like small lightnings. And he
said, approvingly:

“That is a fine magic which has restored to me my youth and the
vigorousness I had in Midian before I was kidnapped by those
stiff-necked and unaffectionate Jews.”

“And will you now be going into Antan?” asked Gerald, rather anxiously.

“Not yet, my friend,” replied the merry, strong, young Arabian storm
god. “Oh, very certainly, not yet! No, I have had quite enough of my
illogical position as a Christian and of the worries of being
rationalized by incomprehensible foreigners. I shall thankfully return
to my Midianites and to my little shrines upon Seir and Sinai and Horeb,
and to the quiet living of a local godling. I shall be hearing again my
own people’s sane and intelligible prayers for rain, and I shall be
snuffing up the smoke of such rational offerings as kids and goats and
an occasional prisoner of war, just as I used to do, where I was given
due credit for my actions, and where you heard no unpleasant personal
scandal circulated about my being triplets. In the meanwhile, my
benefactor, is there not any favor which, in my turn, I can do you?”

“Indeed, my dear sir,” Gerald answered, harking back to that worriment
which in a neighborhood so full of sorcerers and wizards stayed always
in the rear of Gerald’s mind, “there is a small one, now you mention it.
For we have a boy, as you perceive. And it occurs to me that this is the
first chance to have Theodorick Quentin Musgrave properly christened
according to the rites of the Protestant Episcopal church—”

The storm god asked of Gerald, in good-humored surprise. “But do I now
look to you much like an Episcopalian clergyman?”

“Well, sir, I admit the situation is perplexing. Nevertheless, you
remain, so far as I can see, one of the three official heads of the
Christian church, in every denomination. And as such, you must be wholly
competent to administer the sacred rites of that baptism to which we
Musgraves are accustomed.”

He who had been a bishop laughed again. For an instant he glanced
sidewise at Maya, rather impishly. Then the god called to him Theodorick
Quentin Musgrave.

The boy came forward without speaking. There had never been any dearer
brat since time began, Gerald reflected, than was this sturdy droll
red-headed jackanapes who waited there holding his small chin well up in
order to look with politely puzzled interest at the storm god’s
glittering face and the tiny lightnings which played about it. Gerald
was abeam with the most fatuous sort of pride in Theodorick’s perfect
behavior. Gerald glowed all over, now that awkward matter of the boy’s
christening was being at last attended to, by the very highest
authority. And Gerald nodded smilingly and with some inconsequence at
his dear stupid Maya, so that she too might note how splendidly
Theodorick was behaving. The boy was displaying the composure and the
excellent manners of a true Musgrave.

Then the storm god dipped his fingers in his unfinished glass of milk,
and upon Theodorick’s lifted forehead he drew a sign. Gerald was not
wholly certain, afterward, that it was the sign of a cross.

“This is another sort of baptism than that which restored my youth. For
youth this child already has,—to every seeming,” the god said, a bit
unaccountably. “Therefore I now release this child whom I did not
create, I release him from the bondage of the woman and of the Adversary
who caused him to live upon this earth. I decree a forgiveness for the
seven crimes. I cry a remission of the seven punishments.”

“I must say, though, you have been long enough about it,” Maya placidly
observed....

As for Gerald, now that the ceremony was over, he was unaffectedly
hugging Theodorick, and telling him that he was far too big a boy to be
kissing people, and the vaguely puzzled, clinging child was asking, But
who started it, Father?...

And the storm god was saying to Maya, “Do you forget, my dear Havvah,
that it is from your service I am releasing him?”

She answered, still quite placidly: “So far as that goes, the imp has
well earned a holiday; and it is not as if I were dependent upon him.
No, but I confess to wondering—and not for the first time,
either,—just what you may be up to.”




                                  40.
                         On the Turn of a Leaf


SO THE Oriental storm god went back into the world of everyday, to
look for his old shrines upon Sinai and Horeb: and Gerald was happily
rid of a future subject whom, he could not but feel, it would have been
a bit awkward to have as a subject. And the evening passed tranquilly,
although it seemed to Gerald that Theodorick was rather moody and quiet
after his christening.

But it was not until the next day that Theodorick, just after breakfast,
spoke with a voice which seemed to Gerald not quite the voice of a
child: and Theodorick told his parents he wanted to go down into Antan.

Gerald was troubled. Yet he suggested, with very careful levity, “If—?”

“If you please,” the but half-smiling, ugly, so dear brat now added,
docilely.

“Why, it must be as your father says,” Maya replied. She had paused in
her sweeping off of the porch, and for a moment she held the broom
slantwise as she meditated over the boy’s notion. “But, for one, I see
no great harm in your having a little outing, for I will put a
protection on you. Only, you must promise to be back in good time to
have your face and hands washed for supper.”

Gerald said forlornly, “But what are those small yellow things you are
sweeping from the porch, my dear?”

“They are fallen leaves from a sycamore-tree, left here last night by
that wind, Gerald: and I really do wish you would not ask such silly
questions, when I was talking about something quite different.”

“But that means summer is ending, Maya. It means an end of all growing.
It means that not anything now will become any larger or more lovely.”

“Upon my word, but I never did hear of any such nonsense as you do talk
sometimes, for a grown man, Gerald, as if summer did not always end!”

“That is it, precisely. It always ends: and the warmth and comfort of it
perish. Yes, there is death in the air. I do not find that cheering. And
that is all, my darling.”

“Why, then, Gerald, if you are quite through with that up-in-the-air
sort of talking—which may be very deep and clever indeed, only I happen
not to understand it, and certainly have no wish to,—why, then, I was
asking you about something entirely different.”

“Oh, yes, you were speaking of Theodorick! Well, boys do get restless
without any playmates, I suppose. I will talk to him about his notion
while you are making up the beds.”

Nothing could have been more prosaic. Yet Gerald was troubled. He could
hear Maya inside the cottage, already thumping at the pillows. All about
him seemed matter of fact, and comfortable, and familiar, and stable.
And yet everything, as he somehow knew, was about to change. There awoke
in him as yet no real unhappiness, but just a faint uneasiness mixed
with resentment, now that he noted the fall of the first leaf in autumn,
and knew he was powerless to stay the beginning change in everything
about his small, snug home.




                                  41.
                          Child of All Fathers


THEN Gerald followed the child down to the roadside. And they talked
together under the chestnut-tree, just where Gerald had talked with so
many strange beings who had passed beyond Mispec Moor in that continuous
journeying toward Antan.

First Gerald performed that needful rite which would reveal the truth.
The child watched quietly. By and by Theodorick began to smile. But he
said never a word until his father was through with these droll doings.

Then Gerald questioned his small son. Theodorick replied. The appearance
of a little child still sat there, and the soft red lips of a child were
moving, but that curious tongue which was like a small white serpent was
speaking about matters never known to any child.

No one of Gerald’s excursions into the darker magics had prepared him
for what was now in part revealed. Something of the spaces outside the
world apparent to human senses Gerald knew, and of the realms beyond
Earth’s orbit he, as a former student of magic, was not ignorant. But
now he understood from what remote abyss his wife had drawn the being
which seemed his child: a bit unwillingly, he could even surmise with
what kind of enchantments Maya had fetched this seeming into the happier
superficial world which is apparent to human senses.

And Gerald was moved: he was, as so many husbands have been, before and
since, now almost frightened by this glimpse of the unswerving and
whole-hearted and unscrupulous love which women nourish for that man
whom marriage has given them to look after. He was not worthy, he
contritely felt, of being thus idolized and of being coddled at the
fearful price of such unearthly indiscretions. And Gerald was sincerely
touched, now that he comprehended to what lengths Maya had gone to
gratify his whim of wanting a son, out of hand. She had warned him, too,
that he was contriving for himself grief. Yes, her womanly intuition
had, somehow, foreseen that to which all his cleverness had been blind.
And yet, even so, Maya had not denied him his desire, because poor Maya
pampered him in everything, to the accompaniment of a commentary
howsoever tart.

And Gerald thought too of how, a moment since, his worst dread had been
that the boy was an illusion. He looked at his beloved son, knowing now
what inhabited that freckled and droll, sturdy little body. The boy had
of a sudden become strange; he was now a threat of unimaginable danger,
and a creature worse than evil: yet Gerald knew, with a dull wonder,
that he loved Theodorick Quentin Musgrave even now....

Gerald by and by put yet another question to this dreadful parody of a
child’s innocence and helplessness, to the being whom Gerald invoked as
Abdel-Hareth.

“But I have served her purpose,—my father,” the child replied, with a
rather perturbing smile. “Oh, but I know! She has had many husbands.
Most of them desired a son. I have always been that son.”

Then, after an instant of silence, the being who was speaking through
the child’s dear lips told of the bonds from which the Midianite storm
god’s touch and absolution had released him. Gerald found this part of
the story particularly unpleasant. And Theodorick Quentin Musgrave, whom
Gerald still addressed as Abdel-Hareth, went on to tell why he must now
go downward into Antan, to encounter, not the Master Philologist, but
Queen Freydis.

Gerald asked, What was needed of Queen Freydis? The child told him. Then
Gerald shivered. He felt, if only for the instant, physically cold and
nauseated. Still, that this creature should desire to return to its
unearthly home was natural enough.

“I comprehend,” said Gerald. “I comprehend a great deal which was
unknown to me ten minutes ago. I confess to being surprised by much that
I have learned from you. Nevertheless, my son,—if you will pardon the
force of habit, sir, and the love I had for my own little, so dear
son—! But I drift into emotional remarks which would be wholly out of
place. My voice, as I note with sincere regret, evinces a distressing
tendency—”

Gerald paused. He gulped. He spoke now in a voice that was light and
high-pitched and rather hysterical.

“In fine, my dear Abdel-Hareth, as you see, I incline somewhat to
blubber like a badly whipped baby. I can but ask you to respect the
emotions of a suddenly bereaved parent, without bothering to understand
his confused utterances. No: you have given me my desire, and my great
happiness. A part of that dies now. But I have had it, utterly. I am
content. I will see to it that you, in your turn, sir, get what you
desire.”




                                  42.
                         Theodorick Rides Forth


IT WAS after using his handkerchief a bit that Gerald returned to
Maya. Nor did it surprise him she had already prepared a neatly wrapped
up lunch for Theodorick Quentin Musgrave to be eating that day in Antan.

Gerald said, with painstaking carelessness, “Well, my dear, after
talking the matter over, I have decided we may as well let the boy go.”

“Why, to be sure!” said Maya. “And a great deal of bother, too, there
has been made this morning over nothing, as if I did not already have
quite enough to bother me!”

And with that, she summoned from among her enchanted geldings the
handsomer of the pair who formerly had been emperors.

“For a child of mine must go in proper state,” said Maya.

Then Gerald said: “No. An imperial steed is well enough, but a divine
steed is better. Let him take Kalki!”

“Now, really, Gerald, your unreasonableness sometimes surprises even me!
For you know perfectly well that Kalki is your own horse, and that you
will be needing him yourself when you ride down to the appointed kingdom
you are always talking your stuff and nonsense about.”

Gerald looked at her for some while. He was conscious of a hushed great
exultation that in a world wherein all else seemed doubtful and unstable
he had, somehow, through blind luck, won to his Maya and her
snappishness and her unswerving and whole-hearted and quite unscrupulous
love for him. She was not pretty, she was not brilliant, she was not
even easy to live with. But Gerald knew now that he and this woman were
one person; and that any living without Maya would be a maimed business;
and that there could be nothing in Antan which could conceivably content
him for the loss of this dear, ever-wrangling, dull-witted woman.

Then Gerald said: “But it is prophesied that the power of Antan shall
pass to the rider upon Kalki. No harm can befall the rider upon Kalki.
So we will let—we will let our son take Kalki. For in this way we will
secure his protection, and we will remove the one chance of my ever
leaving you, who are worth all the kingdoms that have ever been.”

Maya said, “But—”

Gerald, smiling, replied, “Nevertheless!”

Then the illusion called Theodorick Quentin Musgrave was lifted up by
Gerald to the back of Kalki, and it was Gerald who adjusted the stirrups
for his successor upon the divine steed. And the seeming of a child rode
down toward the goal of all the gods, a rather quaintly pathetic little
figure perched up there so high upon the back of the huge shining
stallion.

Gerald watched the two pass out of his sight. His arms lifted after them
ever so slightly. His arms seemed to ache as he recalled the feel of
that small body and the warmth and yieldingness of it, which were now
lost forever. Theodorick Quentin Musgrave was only an illusion contrived
by forces which it was not comfortable to think about. Gerald knew that
now with certainty. And it did not matter. Nor did it cheer him to
reflect—as he did,—that he was in no worse case than all other
fathers, no one of whom might ever retain the child that was little and
helpless, and was loved for no reason at all, as nobody could quite love
the hobbledehoy thumping schoolboy or even the estimable young man into
whom that warm and yielding, sturdy, so small body might develop....

Then Gerald turned to Maya. “I have only you. But that which I have
suffices me. I have been lucky, O my dearest, very far beyond my
merits.”

She was regarding him with a sort of troubled fondness; and her speech
now was hardly snappish at all. “You really are, my poor Gerald, quite
too ridiculous about the child! You talk, you actually do talk, as
though he were not ever coming back,—and in good time for supper, too,
unless he wants a spanking.”

At that, Gerald raised a protesting hand. “Do you not trick me into
optimism, also! Too much ambition and high dreams and that which was
perhaps divine have now departed forever. The illusion which you created
to be our son has departed, forever. But use and wont and a great deal
of honest love remain. I do not say these things are heroic. I do say
that these suffice. So do you let the strong bonds which are about me
content you, my darling, without wreathing them in the paper flowers of
optimism.”

“But are you, also,” Maya said, “content?”

Gerald answered: “I am well content. Day in, day out, let there be
between us faith, and aid, and a great fondness, O my dear, and no
parting! For I am content and very contrite. I know that any life
without you would be a maimed business. I know that I desire only to
continue in our quiet way of living upon Mispec Moor. For the middle way
of life is best. What need have I to be a god or to be seeking
unfamiliar places so that I may rule over them? That way is troubled,
and too full of noise and striving. It is better to be content. It is
better to be content with the dear, common happenings of human life,
shared loyally with the one woman whose love for you is limitless and
does not change, for all that it is blind to none of your failings; and
to know that these things are enough and very far beyond your deserts;
and not to be insanely hankering after any more high-hearted manner of
living which is out of your reach or, at any rate, is attained through
more trouble than it is probably worth. Ah, yes, the middle way of life
is best.”

“At least it is some comfort,” Maya said, “to hear you talking almost
sensibly.”

Then she reached up, still with a grave and rather tender smiling upon
her beloved, homely face; and she took away from Gerald’s eyes the
rose-colored spectacles.

“In fact,” said a male voice, “the woman’s task is ended.”




                                  43.
                        Economics of Redemption


FOR now had come to them, traveling back from Antan, the brown man.
This brown man came, he said, to summon Maya to her appointed task of
transforming yet other men into domestic animals.

“—For women,” he said, also, “have always their fond task and their
beneficent labor. Here, I repeat, the woman’s task is ended. But yonder
many men go untamed and unbroken to the sane ways of compromise.”

Then Maya a bit absent-mindedly assented, as she put away those
spectacles of hers for future use, that, in point of fact, she supposed
she had done everything that was actually necessary in Gerald’s case,
although nobody ever would really know what a trial he had been to her.

And Gerald for one instant looked at his wife. He found in his wife’s
face that which it is the doom of most husbands to find there at one
time or another. And it caused Gerald to laugh a little.

“Nevertheless,” Gerald said, quietly, “I am Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper
and the Preserver, the Well-beloved of Heavenly Ones. I am Lord of the
Third Truth, in this world which knows of only two truths and of the
compromises which they beget.”

The brown man greeted that with a thin smile. “You have been long
expected. Oh, very long have scepticism and despair, with somewhat
varying voices, invoked your name, saying, ‘Who will overthrow the
Master Philologist!’”

“Well, and now,” said Gerald, with the outline of a swagger, for he was
getting himself more in hand, “now that prophecy is about to be
fulfilled, for I am Hoo, and none other.”

“But, really, friend, I do not see how you can be an interrogative
pronoun.”

“To a god, and more particularly to a Dirghic god, all incarnations are
possible. There is no reason whatever why I should not be an
interrogative pronoun. It is merely a matter of divine election.”

And the brown man civilly inclined his grave brown head, as he remarked:

“Do you have it your own way! Indeed, my people have very often derived
their deities from less promising locations than the pages of a grammar.
And upon the whole, your epiphany is most gratifying. For I try to keep
my people content: yet it has been lamented, from the beginning, that no
mythology revealed a god who might answer that word which the Master
Philologist speaks to all the gods of men. And so, between despair and
scepticism, those of my people who were so unwise as to exercise their
minds in fields wherein thinking does not make for happiness, have very
long been saying, ‘Who will redeem the goal of all the gods of men from
the Master Philologist?’ Now it appears that this word also has become
flesh; and that this interrogative pronoun Who? stands here before us.
Yes, I consider that quite gratifying; for it is desirable that the
sceptical and the despairing also should be contented, by being
justified in their faith.”

“You quibble,” Gerald replied, “you quibble very tediously and
frivolously, in the divine presence of a god who is about to take over
his appointed kingdom, and to make known that Third Truth which is not
known upon Mispec Moor, where the one teaching is that we copulate and
die.”

“But uncelestial common-sense has always been my failing. So I must tell
you, friend, that it seems to me, now that you have abandoned the
Redeemer’s steed to a small freckled illusion, Antan has nothing to
expect even from the mysterious awfulness of an interrogative pronoun.
And yet, for one, I abandoned the place when your dwarfed deputy
approached it—”

“And you acted wisely, sir,” Gerald replied, with simple dignity. “No
matter how potent may be the impious sorceries of the Master
Philologist, a child has entered into his domain, fearing nothing and
loving all. The fact that the powers of evil cannot prevail against this
conjunction is well known to every citizen of the United States of
America.”

But the brown man still seemed rather moody. “I cannot say.... No, you
and my friend Jahveh have, between you, loosed against Antan a power
which is not of my kingdom. I therefore do not pretend to say what may
come of the experiment. I merely await with lively interest, and at a
reassuring distance, the upshot of this experiment, now that—of all the
beings from beyond Earth’s orbit,—Abdel-Hareth has been deputed to ride
upon the Redeemer’s steed.”

“And, in any case, it is always very certain, dearie,” Maya said, “that
no real comfort can ever come of such foolish notions as I have ridded
you of a little by a little. And in exchange for those toplofty dreams,
I have trusted you as far as seemed expedient, and I have given you all
that was really good for you. I have given you a season of content and
every wholesome joy of domesticity now for some thirty years of mortal
time. No man gets more from life, my poor dearie. None attempts to get
more without ending in disappointment and discontent: and so no sane man
tries to get any more than you have had. And the end finds even the most
wise and reasonable son of Adam—though, to be sure, that is not saying
much,—if he but lives rationally enough to survive all thirty of those
quiet happy years, with a wife who is just as I am, whatever she may
have seemed to begin with.”

Gerald saw, without any grief or horror, that he had now lost both his
child and his wife. For Maya had become old. She was again the
shrivelled and wrinkled creature, red and inflamed and hideous among her
tousled tresses, that he had first found upon Mispec Moor. And
fleetingly he reflected that she spoke the truth: all women, howsoever
dear and beautiful, did become like that, provided they did not first
die and become even more repulsive carrion.... But Gerald lacked time to
discuss these generalities just now: for he had been looking toward
Antan....

“To this chatter about domesticity and pessimism and content,” Gerald
replied sternly, “I answer that the Well-beloved of Heavenly Ones is
above all aphorisms. I answer that I am Hoo, the Lord of that Third
Truth whose nature is unknown to you. Now that Third Truth is loosed. Do
you look now upon Antan!”

The woman and the Adversary had turned when Gerald pointed, quite as
majestically as though he knew just what he was talking about. In the
midst of Antan they could see, as Gerald had already seen, a flaring
green flame. Now this great flaming sunk earthward, much as the waters
of a fountain descend; the flame spread evenly to every side, sweeping
outward in an ever-widening circle; and now this flaming was no longer
green, but red and glowing. You saw this flood of fire pass equably and
swiftly, surging outward toward the horizon, where at once the mountains
collapsed and disappeared. All that remained was flat and black and
bare. Antan no longer existed.

It was from such a miracle that the woman and the Adversary looked back
toward Gerald, with every sign of sincere respect.

And Gerald’s bewilderment was rather more profound than theirs. He could
surmise only that the dreadful being to whom he had given Kalki had held
to its plan, as voiced by the lips of a child, and had loosed elemental
fires of a nature incomprehensible to Gerald, since they were drawn from
beyond Earth’s orbit. Yet that seemed to Gerald no real reason for
marring a fine attitude or for failing to preserve his self-respect
before the woman and the Adversary. Tricked he might have been: that was
a wholly different thing from ever admitting that he had been tricked.
Gerald knew at least that the illusion which had appeared to be his son
had entered the perhaps equally illusory place where Gerald now might
never enter; and that, whatever had befallen the best loved but one of
his illusions, the rider upon the silver stallion had destroyed Antan.
And it seemed obvious, too, that Abdel-Hareth had returned homeward....

Therefore Gerald claimed with a clear conscience the miracle which
Gerald had, in fact, actually performed, at one remove. And Gerald kept
his long chin, resolutely, well up....

“So that,” observed the brown man, quietly, “that is the end of Antan. I
do not complain.”

“I had forgotten,” then said the wrinkled old woman who had been Maya of
the Fair Breasts, “I had forgotten how wilful is that Abdel-Hareth who
got his being upon Earth from me. Something of this sort was to be
looked for, the first moment that the headstrong wretch was freed from
my control. Still, Jahveh has gained less than we have gained through
Jahveh’s meddling. Abdel-Hareth has served me even at the last by
removing Antan from the horizon. Earth will be quieter now; and my
daughters will not be so hard put to it to keep men in reasonable
order.”

“I forget nothing,” the brown man remarked, drily. “And so I did not
await the coming of your first-born in the likeness of a child whose
fearless innocence surmounts all evil. For it was the seeming of a
little child who rode up against Antan, you conceive, with every
appearance of that faith against which the snares of no sorcerer and of
hardly nine women in ten can prevail. Such innocence is a quite
dangerous counterfeit. For one, I do not meddle with it nor with any
other unearthly phenomenon. I have my realm. It suffices me.”

The woman asked, “But what, what, Janicot, do you suppose has happened?”

“How shall we ever know, dear Havvah, when manifestly there are no
survivors of that happening? Antan, in any case, is no loss to us.”

Here Gerald broke in upon their talking; and Gerald shook at them his
red head lordlily.

“You little creatures guess in vain at the means which I have employed.
And equally in vain will you supplicate me to reveal those means. For I
shall tell you nothing. It is sufficient that the Well-beloved of
Heavenly Ones has accomplished the mission of his tenth incarnation with
a thoroughness not customary in interrogative pronouns. I came to redeem
my appointed kingdom from the rule of usurpers. I came as the Lord of
that Third Truth which is unknown to those who teach only that we
copulate and die. That Third Truth has been loosed. No, I shall tell you
nothing of its nature, for you are not fit to comprehend the Third
Truth. But the mightiness of it your own eyes have witnessed. So Antan
is now redeemed—”

His voice broke here. But Gerald presently continued:

“Antan is now redeemed at a great price. That woman and that child to
whom my heart was given have perished. I remain. I know that these two
were illusions. Nevertheless, I remain. There is no bond upon the Lord
of the Third Truth to be happy: there is a strong bond upon every Helper
and Preserver not to evade the full discharge of his mission. What, you
may ask of me, is the mission of the Lord of the Third Truth? And I will
reply to you out of my divine wisdom. It is the mission of the Lord of
the Third Truth, howsoever he may palter or struggle against his doom,
to destroy that which he most loves.”




                                  44.
                       Economics of Common-Sense


NOW Gerald sat with his head bowed. He heard a talking between the old
woman who had been his Maya and the brown man who was the Adversary of
all the gods of men.

“What is it men desire?” said the woman. “My daughters prepare for them
fine food and drink, my daughters see to it that their homes are snug,
and at the end of each day my daughters love them dutifully. All things
that men can ask for, my daughters furnish them. Why need men cherish
strange desires which do not know their aims? for how can any of my
daughters content such desires?”

“I also marvel at the desires of men,” replied the Adversary. “I, too,
am ready to accord whatsoever a man can ask for sensibly and in plain
words. I, who am the Prince of this world, remain a generous and
ever-indulgent monarch. I will to make my people happy. My curious
opulence awaits at every hand to afford my subjects whatsoever they can
ask. But men want more. They desire that which was never in my kingdom.
They have followed after impalpable gods: they have been enamored of
phantoms. They have believed that their desire was in Antan, in part
because they did not know what was their desire, and in part because
they did not know what was Antan. Yes, it is well that Antan has
perished.”

“This world is well enough,” the woman said. “It is well to be born into
this world of an ever-loving mother. It is well to be a young man in
this world wherein one may follow after young women and be cherished by
them. There is soft living in this world when you have come as near
discretion as men ever get and have had the wit to find a wife to take
care of you. And at the end it is well to fare out of this world quietly
and incuriously, with a deft-handed woman to nurse you and to wash your
body afterward. But men want more.”

“This world is very good. My kingdom is a wholly sufficing kingdom,”
agreed the Adversary. “The wise man, as goes human wisdom, will be
content with the inexhaustible goodness of those material things which
all are mine. For the five senses are an endless comfort; the five
senses are an endless store of anodynes. A man may purchase bodily ease
and a drugged brain with his five senses. But men want more.”

“So they have passed beyond my daughters,” the woman said. “One by one,
a many have passed, perversely and so lonely, from all my daughters
could contrive to content them: and one by one a host of demented
romantic men have struggled toward Antan, and toward what befalls all
mortals and immortals there. Yes, it is very well that Antan has
perished.”

“One by one,” said the Adversary, “they have derided my kingdom. They
have followed after impalpable gods. These gods passed futilely. But
they drew many of my subjects from me, all to be lost forever in that
beguiling Antan.”

“Men are great fools, and my daughters can hardly hamper their folly.
That which my daughters can do they perform willingly. But not all men
could my daughters preserve from the madness which drew men toward Antan
and into ruinous desires to judge the goal of every god. At last, Antan
has fallen: it is very well.”

The Adversary said, more leniently: “Men are, beyond doubt, great fools.
But they are my people; and those that I can save I save. Yet many evade
me. And their dreaming troubles all my realm and me, too, they trouble
now and then. But Antan has fallen: and after that foolishness at least
my people will not be following any more.”

“The daughters of Eve are not troubled now and then, they are troubled
at every moment, by the dreams of men. Such of these blundering men as
fond and eternal laboring may save, my daughters win away from their
toplofty dreams. But the work is hard; the work is endless; and our
losses are many.”

And then the Adversary said: “We two who began in the Garden to contrive
for the happiness of men, and to be speaking always for the real good of
men,—yes, certainly, our work is hard and endless. For men stay
romantically minded creatures who aspire beyond my kingdom. Yet we do
not despair.”




                                  45.
                      Farewell to All Fair Welfare


WHEN Gerald raised his head he was alone on the naked moor, for the
brown man had departed, and Maya had gone away with the first of all her
lovers, and her illusions had vanished, including the neat log and
plaster cottage. And mists were creeping up from the ruined kingdom of
Antan, in billows of ever-thickening gray which seemed to be the smoke
from that great burning.

Then Gerald said:

“I have come out of my native home on a gain-less journeying with no
profit in it: yet there has been pleasure in that journeying. I do not
complain. Let every man that must journey, without ever knowing why,
from the dark womb of his mother to the dark womb of his grave, take
pattern by me!

“For all that every pleasure is departed from me, I have had pleasure. I
do not grieve because I have gained nothing in my journeying. The great
and best words of the Master Philologist stay unrevealed; that supreme
word which was in the beginning, and which will be when all else has
perished, I may not surmise: but I have played with many words which
were rather pretty. In the art of magic which I chose to be my art I
have performed no earth-shaking wonders, yet in small thaumaturgies I
have had some hand. I did not ride the divine steed to my journey’s end:
but a part of the way I rode quite royally.

“That which I heard of from afar I have not won to in my foiled
journeying. So I now cry farewell to that Queen Freydis whom, I suspect,
I might have loved with a great love if lesser women had not solicited
me. I cry farewell to the Mirror of the Hidden Children in which, I
believe, I might have found myself as I am, and might have come to
knowledge of the Third Truth. And I cry farewell to Antan, to that
never-won-to goal of all the gods which was, I think, my appointed
kingdom. I have surmised high things. I have gained none of them. My
doom has been a little doom. It contents me.

“I may well be content, because all that a man may hope for I have had,
who have learned at least that the lot of a man is more sure than the
lot of any god. For the deceit which you put upon me, O venerable and
subtle Æsred, I cry out my gratitude. There was the seeming of a home
and of a woman who loved and tended me and of a child. I may not speak
of my love for these illusions. Now they have perished. But my memories
remain: and they are more dear to me than is any real thing.

“All, all, is perished! It may be that I have offended the two truths
which I did not esteem sufficiently august. And I who willed to be Lord
of the Third Truth have found no third truth anywhere. I have found only
comfortably colored illusions. But I am content with that which I have
found here upon Mispec Moor.”

In the while that Gerald had been speaking, the mists rose thicker and
thicker from destroyed Antan. He had noted in the while that he spoke
how the first wavering thin billows crept tentatively up the hills and
along the roadway, creeping upon the ground, and under the low-swinging
tree branches, with, as it seemed, a pre-meditated furtiveness; and
then, as if emboldened by finding the way unopposed, these mists had
risen up from the ground, always swiftlier, until now they had eclipsed
all. Gerald, now that he ended his talking, could see nothing palpable
anywhere save the little patch of intermingled stone and grass
immediately beneath his feet; and about him everywhere were the cool
mists, lighted with a diffused gray radiancy which seemed to come from
all sides.




                              PART ELEVEN
                         THE BOOK OF REMNANTS

                  “When Wages are Paid, Work is Over.”




                                  46.
                      The Gray Quiet Way of Ruins


GERALD now was wandering among thick luminous gray mists, on a gray
way which led through long quieted places. It led him to a
weather-beaten pavilion of badly stained and tattered cloth which once
had been flesh-colored.

Within this pavilion was a masked skeleton. The gleaming bones sat
upright, and in unmarred order, in a gilded chair. A fan lay in the lap
of this skeleton, a fan that was painted with the gay amours of
Harlequin and Columbine, which Pierrot was observing, wistfully, through
a gap in a yew-hedge: and the skeleton wore a little black velvet
carnival mask, which covered all the upper front part of the skull,
about the eye-sockets.

And beyond that was a castle, whose exterior was overlaid with cracked
and peeling black-and-gold lacquer work. This castle was empty
everywhere of any inhabitant. Gerald passed through its courtyard and
about many large rooms and corridors, all hung with faded, very ancient
tapestries. He encountered nobody. Then he came to the inmost tower,
builded of horn, and so into the room which had been the bedchamber of
the lord of that castle, and he perceived the reason why not even mice
nor spiders dared to dwell in that place.

Afterward Gerald came to a dragon’s den. But the dragon was dead long
ago, and the cupboards of that den were as empty as had been the castle
of Vraidex, except for a pepper cruet and a salt cruet, both of
time-blackened silver, and a light golden semi-circular crown inset with
emeralds such as blonde princesses were used to wear in that dragon’s
heyday.

Thence Gerald passed to a jousting ground, and that too was tenantless
and fallen into decay. In the paved place where knights had tilted
against one another lay at random nineteen broken spears and three
tarnished shields. In the ladies’ gallery Gerald found only a chamber
pot. The hangings of this gallery were discolored and torn, but you
could yet see that these hangings had been of black cloth embroidered
with small rearing silver horses.

And Gerald came also to a green pasture through which flowed unruffled a
deep stream of still water. This pasture was strewn everywhere with many
curious objects. He noted a crozier, and a wheel, and a camel-hair
shirt, and a huge gridiron, and a copper dish containing the breasts of
a young woman. He found in that pasture also a porcelain box of
ointment, and a great saw, and a blue hat, and a large iron comb, which
like the saw had long-dried blood upon its teeth, and a palm branch, and
two enormous, very rusty keys marked with the monogram S. P.

Then Gerald passed where three crosses lay overturned.

And beyond that the way was yet more murky. To this hand and the other
hand Gerald could just dimly divine the ruined porticos and domes and
pylons of incredibly ancient buildings: he seemed to go among obelisks
and many-storied square towers. But all was very gray and dubious. He
wandered now in a cloudiness wherein not anything was indisputable.

He passed across a narrow bridge beneath which showed a dark and
sluggish river. In that water Gerald could see moving, many-colored
figures which were not strange to him. For Evasherah was there, and
Evaine, and Evarvan, and Evadne also, smiling at him now for the last
time, and he could see how notably they had all resembled one another.
And yet one more woman was there, a blue-clad woman in a crown just such
as Maya had worn before she became his wife, but the face of this woman
Gerald could not clearly discern.

And upon the farther bank of the dark river one sat among a herd of
black swine, and the eyes of all these swine gleamed meditatively at
Gerald through their ragged white lashes. The man arose: and Gerald saw
this swine-driver was that same young red-haired Horvendile who was Lord
of the Marches of Antan.

Then Horvendile began to speak.




                                  47.
                    How Horvendile Gave Up the Race


HORVENDILE spoke of the race of Manuel, and of the joy, and the
vexation, too, which the antics of this so inadequate race had been to
Horvendile. And it was of Merlin that Gerald was thinking now, for it
seemed to him that here was yet another poet who did not any longer
delight to shape and to play with puppets, because Horvendile was
saying:

“Now I abandon a race whose needs are insatiable. For tall Manuel lived
always wanting what he had not ever found, and never, quite, knowing
what thing it was which he wanted, and without which he might not ever
be contented. And Jurgen also, after Heaven’s very best had been done to
grant him what he sought for, could reply only that he was Jurgen who
sought he knew not what. And all their descendants have been like these
maddening two in this at least, all seeking after they could not say
what. Nobody can do anything for such a race! For their needs have
stayed insatiable: their journeying has been, in every land and in every
time, a foiled journeying: and in the end, in the inevitable unvarying
end, each one of you treads that gray quiet way of ruins which leads
hither and to no other place.”

“Well, for that matter,” Gerald said, “it seems that you too,
Horvendile, have some engagement in this hog wallow.”

“I endeavor, in point of fact, to become familiar with this last stretch
of limbo, against the time of my own possible need not ever to be
remembered anywhere.”

“—And for my part, I came of my own choice and in self-protection,”
Gerald continued, with his chin well up. “For I must tell you,
Horvendile, that I have had little peace since our last meeting.”

Then Gerald (putting out of mind those attendant, very hungry looking
pigs) related the epic of his journeying, without reserving anything out
of false modesty, now that he talked with a confrère. He told of how he
had descended into the underwater palace of the Princess Evasherah and
of the orgies which he had shared in. He spoke, a bit contritely, of the
amorous excesses he had been led into by the wives and the three hundred
and fifty-odd concubines of Glaum during their master’s absence. With
unconcealed embarrassment he told of how the people of Lytreia had
endeavored to detain him in their temple, to reign there as their tribal
god, because they found his nose to be so much more majestic than the
idol they hitherto had worshipped. He confessed to his dalliance with
the enamored Fox-Spirit. He frankly admitted that he had not behaved
well in seducing Evarvan and then deserting her after her marvelous
beauty had become to him an old story. He told of how Queen Freydis had
come repeatedly to him with the most generous proffers of her realm and
person; and he spoke of this matter with visible compunction, because he
could not deny that after three or four bouts he had repulsed the
infatuated poor lady rather rudely.

In fine, said Gerald, since every man ought honestly to acknowledge his
own weaknesses, he could get no real peace in the Marches of Antan. So
at the last he had stolen away, into this quiet, gray untroubled place,
of his own accord, just to be rid of so many persons who took unfair
advantage of his over-amiable and fiery nature....

And Horvendile, at the end of Gerald’s repentant narrative, observed: “I
comprehend. You have been, in brief, the devil of a fellow and a sad rip
among the ladies.”

“Oh, but you wrong me! Such a suspicion is very horrifying and quite
unjust! No, it is merely that not even Fair-haired Hoo, the Helper and
Preserver, the Lord of the Third Truth, and the Well-beloved of Heavenly
Ones, is immune to over-constant temptation.”

And at that, Horvendile shrugged. “A god with so many fine titles is not
to be argued with. In any case, do you be of good cheer, for even after
all these regrettable amours, and beyond the mire that my swine delight
in, the Princess still awaits you.”

“But in what place?” said Gerald, “and how is she called?”

“She awaits in every place so long as youth remains—”

“Upon my word, now, Horvendile, but that is the truth, and a rather
plaguing truth!”

“—However, this especial Princess is called, as it chances,
Evangeline—”

“Oh, come!” said Gerald, “come now, but really, my dear fellow—!”

“—And at your first sight of her you will be enraptured. For this
Princess Evangeline is so surpassingly lovely that she excels all the
other women your gaze has ever beheld—”

“I know,” said Gerald. “Her face is the proper shape, it is
appropriately colored everywhere, and it is surmounted with an adequate
quantity of hair.”

“—Nor,” Horvendile went on, with rising enthusiasm, “is it possible to
find any defect in her features—”

“No: for, doubtless, the colors of this beautiful young girl’s two eyes
are nicely matched, and her nose stands just equidistant between them.
Beneath this is her mouth; and she has also a pair of ears.”

“In fine,” said Horvendile, with his hands aflourish above his attendant
pigs, “the Princess is young, she exhibits no absolute deformity
anywhere, and your enamored glance will therefore perceive in her no
fault, because of that magic which in the Marches of Antan the Two
Truths exercise over all vigorous young persons.”

“You very movingly depict a woman of extraordinary and, I have not the
least doubt, resistless charm. Nevertheless, I cannot any longer be
wandering about a place wherein there are only two truths, and where the
magic of these Two Truths is forever meddling with my young body, for
the gods of the Marches of Antan do not content me.”

Then Horvendile replied: “Men have found many gods. But these gods pass.
They descend into Antan, and they do not return. One god and one goddess
alone do not pass. They remain eternally, if but to weave eternally a
mist about the seeing and the thinking of the young, and thus to secure
the existence of yet other young persons within a month or so.”

“With observations to that same general effect,” Gerald answered, “I am
not unfamiliar. But let us make the thing complete! Do you now voice,
here in your murky pigsty, one or another long-winded restatement of the
fact that time disastrously affects all organic material. You will then,
I think, have summed up the entire philosophy of the Marches of Antan.
Perhaps it is a true philosophy. Nevertheless, that philosophy is a
morbid materialism such as does not amuse me, who am a self-respecting
citizen of the United States of America. No: I had far rather play with
a beautiful idea than with one utterly lacking in seductiveness. So I
prefer to think that the gods and the dreams of men pass to a noble and
a worthy goal—”

It was then that Horvendile sighed, a bit despondently. “Ah, Gerald, but
how may you presume to speak of such matters, who did not attain to
Antan?”

“My friend,” replied Gerald, affably, “I was too wise to risk any such
indiscretion. No: I did not enter into my appointed kingdom; and I have
destroyed it. Therefore it must remain, so long as I remain, whatever I
choose to imagine it. I retain the privilege of playing with a beautiful
idea, in just the proper half-remorseful frame of mind which begets the
most luxuriant fancies—”

“But—” Horvendile began.

“No, my dear fellow, you are quite wrong.”

Horvendile said, “Still—”

“Yes, there is something in that, at first glance, yet it does not
really touch the root of the matter.”

Horvendile protested, “I was but going to say—”

“I know! I perfectly comprehend your argument. And I admit that you
phrase it forcefully. The trouble is that you are wrong in your
underlying principle.”

Horvendile said, “However—”

“Yes, but not always,” Gerald stated. “For the one way for a poet to
appreciate the true loveliness of a place is not ever to go to it. No,
Horvendile, a poet is not to be fobbed off with facts. No matter what
the surrounding facts might be, all poets from Prometheus to Jurgen have
preferred a beautiful idea to play with. So a logical poet will always
destroy his appointed kingdom, because in this way only can he convert
it into a beautiful idea. Therefore for me, who am a poet of sorts, to
have entered into my appointed kingdom would have been woefully
shiftless. I would have had henceforward only one kingdom. But, as it
is, I can remake the destroyed place several times a day, in my
imaginings, and can every time rebuild it more beautifully. I have thus
a thousand kingdoms, each one of them more lovely than the other. To-day
it will be Evasherah who awaits me there, among all the splendor and the
perfume and the sunlit lewdness of the most ancient East: to-morrow the
sweet singing of feathery-legged Evadne will summon me to a quite
different Antan, which then will be a sea-engirdled, low-lying tropic
island: but the day after that, far more idyllic lures will be recalling
me to that pastel-colored, pastoral and rather populous Antan which is
inhabited by all the many dreams that I had in youth, and is to be made
my strictly personal heaven by the pure lips of Evarvan. Whereas, upon
yet other occasions,—when my turn of mind takes on a more scholastic
turn,—I shall know that in Antan awaits me each paragraph of the
profound, wide erudition of Evaine.... But more often, Horvendile, I
shall think of yet another woman and of a boy child, who were not
wonderful in anything, but who for a while seemed mine. And I shall
believe that these two wait for me, in a much more prosaic Antan; and I
shall know that no magic, howsoever mightier than the less aspiring
dreams of my manhood, can afford to me anything more dear.... For all
that one needs, Horvendile, I have had. Antan could boast of nothing
more desirable, to me, than that which I have had. So now not any power
can ever quell my thankfulness for those illusions which have made sport
with me for my allotted while. And I cry out defiantly, among your
waiting swine, in this gray place of endless ruining, I am content...!”

Then Horvendile replied: “A fool with so many fine words at his tongue’s
tip, a fool also is not to be argued with. For it is a foolishness
beyond any describing, to believe that Antan can be destroyed by you or
by anybody else. Ah, no! your kingdom awaited you, poor Gerald: but you
faltered, you fell away into domesticity,—and you talked! Now it is the
Master Philologist who, through the might of that word which was in the
beginning, and which will be when all else has perished, has removed
your kingdom from your reach, and from your seeing, and even from your
quite whole-hearted belief, forever. Now it is your only comfort to
poultice your failure with such foolish phrases. And now also it is I
who tell you that for such faltering and for such failure, and for such
phrases, there is possible but one answer.”

Thereafter Horvendile gave Gerald a queer word of power, and Horvendile
took out of his pocket a little mirror three inches square. You heard in
the duskiness a flapping of small vigorous wings. Then three white
pigeons stood among the swine, at the feet of Horvendile. He did what
was requisite: and Gerald thus came straightway into a place which was
not unfamiliar.




                              PART TWELVE
                       THE BOOK OF ACQUIESCENCE

                 “Candor is no More Palatable than an
                 Oyster when Either is Out of Season.”




                                  48.
                     Fruits of the Sylan’s Industry


GERALD came thus into the library in which, no more than four months
ago, as it appeared to him, he had quitted his natural body. Lights
burned there, but the room was empty.

Nor did he perceive any marked signs of change. Most of his books were
very much as he had left them. Upon the bookcases were still ranged his
porcelain and brass animals and birds and reptiles. Investigation,
though, revealed the addition to this diminutive fauna of a rather
charming china cat,—a black cat, fast asleep, with a red ribbon about
its neck,—and of a small ivory elephant, which also was black, but had
white tusks.

The chairs, he saw, had been recovered, but it was with a figured stuff
of much the same design and color. The rug that once had been his
mother’s was still underfoot; and the curtains, while new looking, were
of just the same repulsive shade of green velvet that by candle light
turned yellowish.

“It is a quite detestable color. I had always intended to change those
curtains so soon as I could afford it, for a green with some real life
in it. I can but deduce that my body has remained remarkably
conservative through all these thirty years which have seemed to me only
a month or two. My body has evinced commendable industry, also, for here
are dozens upon dozens of books by Gerald Musgrave.”

It seemed a bit droll thus to be confronted with so much strange work
performed by his own natural body,—thought out in his own brain cells,
and written with his own hand,—during the time that these chattels had
been entrusted to the Sylan. Yet the results were gratifying.

For here were not any folderol romances such as Gerald himself, he felt
uneasily, might have perhaps contrived with those brain cells and that
hand, romances which at best would have wasted his readers’ time, and at
worst might have incited unedifying and improper notions. Instead, these
quartos were all serious and learned and scholastic works. Gerald
therefore regarded these large quartos with a justifiable pride and with
profound respect. Their very bindings were in themselves as incompatible
with anything frivolous as were their contents with any unscientific
double meanings. These books had the fine clarity of a physician in
conference with a midwife. Moreover, Gerald’s admiring eyes found nearly
every page empedestalled upon the most impressive looking kind of
footnotes: upon tall footnotes in almost illegibly small type; upon huge
polyglottic footnotes very full of numerals and brackets, which
flatteringly assumed your acquaintance with all human tongues and your
possession of all printed books, so that you could be referred offhand
to such and such a page of an especial edition; and upon footnotes which
appeared to quote from the literature of every known language after
having abbreviated the title of each cited volume into
unintelligibility.

For these quartos dealt with no romantic nonsense such as the phantasms
with which novels vitiate the intelligence and the morals of their
readers, Gerald observed, but with really worth-while ethnographic
matters like the marriage customs of all lands, and the ways of male and
female prostitution among the different races, and with the history in
each country of paederasty, and of lesbianism, and of bestiality, and of
necrophily, and of incest, and of sodomy, and of onanism, and of all
manifestations of the sexual impulse in every era. There, in a more
imaginative vein, were the _Tentative Restoration of the Lost Books of
Elephantis_, the handsomely illustrated _Seed of Minos_, the doctoral
thesis upon _Lingham Worship_, the _Fertility Rites of the Sabbat_, the
privately published _Myth of Anistar and Calmoora_, the _Study of
Priapos_, and the various other monumental works which, although Gerald
did not know this, had already made Gerald Musgrave’s name familiar to
the lecture halls of all universities and the pages of the more learned
reviews.

These quartos were, in fine, the books which had made Gerald Musgrave
the most famous and widely read of American ethnologists; and by his
body’s industry and erudition and broad-mindedness Gerald was properly
impressed. Here seemed, indeed, to be at least one complete and
scholarly treatise devoted to the historical development and the
mechanics and the literature of every known manifestation of the great
forces which had created all life.

“Yes, it is really edifying to note with what zeal and common-sense my
body—while I was a-gypsying with over-ambitious follies,—has
decorously set up as the recorder of historical and scientific truths.”

Then Gerald found upon the next shelf some fourteen tall scrapbooks.
They were full of what the newspapers had printed in laudation and in
the most respectful criticism of the books of Gerald Musgrave. They
contained, also, accounts of the academic honors conferred upon Gerald
Musgrave. They were interleaved with the letters which had been
written—the majority, of course, by that strange race which writes
habitually to authors, but many of them, apparently, by persons of some
consequence,—to Gerald Musgrave about his books.

“My body in my absence has become, thanks to my body’s books, a
reputable and even a looked-up-to citizen. My body is by way of being,
indeed, a personage. I note, too, with that interest appropriate to the
foibles of the great, that my body has also become a somewhat vain old
magpie, gathering up through thirty years every scrap of paper which
happens to display my name.”

Next Gerald lighted on a black box with silver corners, and inside it
was a time-discolored manuscript. This Gerald carried to the
writing-table. And he found it that unfinished romance about his heroic
ancestor, Dom Manuel of Poictesme, just ninety-three pages of it,
precisely as Gerald had left it, with no word changed or added.

“There was not in my natural body sufficient power to sustain the high
inspiration of my youth. So, very sensibly, my body has found other
pursuits, and through them it has become a personage. I do not complain.
Not every body becomes a personage. Even so, it seems a pity to have
denied to mankind the loveliness already created in this fragment.”

But it was just then that the door opened. In the doorway stood a man in
late middle life. And Gerald now for one instant regarded his natural
body and all the dilapidations which time had performed upon that body.

And Gerald somehow comprehended the penned-in and eventless and
self-sacrificing, arduous life of the famous scholar, the life which had
been lived so long by the natural body of Gerald Musgrave. That blinking
magpie, in this somewhat stuffy room,—in the midst of this childish
menagerie of small cats and elephants and dogs and parrots and chickens
and camels and other imbecile toys,—day after day compiled the valuable
and interesting matter in those quartos and the trivial magniloquence in
those scrapbooks. And that, virtually, was all he ever did. Such was his
living in a world profuse in so many agreeabilities,—to be tasted and
seen, to be smelt and heard and handled, at absolutely your own
discretion, in this so opulent world wherein anyone could live very
royally, and with never-failing ardor, upon every person’s patrimony of
the five human senses.

Meanwhile, such self-devotion had paid, under time’s grasping
governance, an exorbitant tax. The impaired shrunk body was unhealthy
looking. Under each of the wavering dim eyes showed a peculiar white
splotch. The skin of the noted scholar was pasty and seemed greasy. He
had hardly any hair except those gray and untended whiskers. Everywhere
he was shrivelled and lean, except for the abrupt, the surprising,
protrusion of a large paunch. He self-evidently had inadequate kidneys,
and an impaired heart, and defective teeth, and a sluggish liver, and
approximately every other drawback to a sedentary person’s late middle
life.

The body of this ornament to scholarship and letters was, in fine, a
quite disgusting bit of wreckage, in need of patching up everywhere; and
a fallen god, when thus confronted by the work of time and of much study
and of intramural living, might very well shake his red ever-busy head
over the one refuge now remaining to down-tumbled divinity.

Nevertheless, Gerald spoke the queer word of power which Horvendile had
given him. There followed for Gerald an instant of dizziness, of a
moment’s blindness....

Then Gerald found that it was he who stood at the door of the library
peering into the quiet lamp-lit room. Before him waited a red-headed,
slim young man in a blue coat and a golden yellow waistcoat, with a tall
white stock and very handsome ruffles about his throat. And the young
fellow was smiling at Gerald Musgrave with a rather womanish mouth, and
in the eyes of the boy was a half-lazy, mildly humorous mockery.

Old Gerald Musgrave adored him with an ardor which was half hatred. Then
he saw that the young fellow did not matter, and that Gerald Musgrave
had bargained well.




                                  49.
                       Triumph of the Two Truths


“THAT is a strange and glorious word for you to be telling me,” the
boy began. “That is a disastrous bargain for you to be seeking. For your
own will has spoken the revealing word which buys back your natural body
now that your outworn crumbling body is of no more worth.”

Gerald answered: “I, who have left the Marches of Antan forever, have
bought freedom from the ever-meddling magic of the Two Truths. At my
first sight of no other female body which is not positively deformed
will I become enraptured. I have bought feet too old for errancy, ears
that are deaf to the high gods, and to the heart-stirring music of great
myths, and to the soft wheedling of women also, and I have bought eyes
too dim to note whether or not Antan still gleams on the horizon. It is
a good bargain.”

Then he took up again the pages of that thirty-year-old romance. That
too remains, he reflected, unfinished, like all else which I have ever
undertaken....

Some day it will be completed by other hands than the thin wrinkled
hands before me. Somebody else,—not born, as yet, it may be,—will be
writing out,—intelligibly, anyhow,—the story of Poictesme and of the
Redeemer of Poictesme and of his fine followers and many children,—but
not half so splendidly as I was going to write it. Somebody else will,
by and by, be beleaguering and entering into—by means of the little,
yet the not wholly despicable, art of letters,—that wonder-haunted
province which—yes, that also,—was a part of my appointed kingdom....
Somebody else will be laying open the fair ways to Bellegarde and to
Amneran and to Storisende, and will be making free these ways to every
person, so that, through the lean lesser art of letters, Poictesme may
become in some sort another Antan,—an Antan perhaps considerably abated
in splendor, but graced at least with easy accessibility....

Yet not even such slight triumphs were to be won by aged feet, and by
ears no longer acute, and by dimming eyes, and by pulses which would not
be riotous ever any more. He tore up the pages one by one, just as, he
recollected now, in the land of Lytreia, Evaine had torn up the sacred
fig-leaves. Glaum had said that the fig-leaf was the true symbol of
romance. Gerald meditatively dropped the destroyed fragments of his
romance into the waste-basket.

Gerald spoke then without any too great hopefulness. “Has my body,
during your inhabitancy of it, my dear fellow, escaped from Evelyn
Townsend? and gone free from the unmerited blessing of a good woman’s
love?”

The red-headed boy before him replied, discreetly: “Your body and the
body of your Cousin Evelyn have always been such good friends!”

And Gerald smiled. “I recognize that phrase. So throughout thirty years
Lichfield has never once forgotten its polite formula for exorcising the
inadmissible!”

“It has been generally felt,” the youngster answered, “that a prominent
man of letters was entitled to his Egeria. Of recent years, to be sure,
your friendship has not been—we will say,—so ardent nor so frequently
manifested. But there has been, to hold you two together, the boy
begotten by your body upon her body. There has been the long usage to
hold you two together. So your friendship has remained unshattered.”

“I had forgotten,” Gerald said, “the boy. Yes, I remember hearing that
you had thoughtfully provided me with offspring during my absence. I
know not quite how to thank you, my dear fellow, for a favor so delicate
and so personal. We will therefore cough and drop the subject.”

Then Gerald leaned back in the chair. He put together his finger-tips,
and smilingly he looked at them with rather tired, old eyes.

“So I stay faithful to one woman, after all! I have been kept in
everything a model American citizen. I have gracefully adhered to the
code of a gentleman. In my private life I have evinced every proper
respect for the chivalrous sacrament of adultery between social equals.
In the field of my professional labors I have composed no puerile and
lascivious romances, but only serious and instructive works. I am, in
brief, in all respects, a credit to my native Lichfield, and, more
generally, to the United States of America.”

He shrugged. He spread out those old-looking, futile hands.

“Well, certainly I must not spoil the miracle. So I submit. I yield to
the demands of propriety. I accept my personal good behavior; I accept
my success; and I accept also my measure of actual famousness.”

Then Gerald said: “Therefore I must, so long as my life lasts, continue
faithfully your work as the recorder of historical and scientific
truths, since it was such truths which brought my name into famousness.
Oh, yes, you may depend upon it, I shall henceforward honor these fine
truths within the limits advisable for anybody now nearing sixty. I
shall serve them, that is, with my pen rather than with other
instruments now perhaps more fallible. For the trained intelligence of
such a famous scholar as I have become cannot deny their proper
importance to those scientific and historical truths which brought him
into famousness,—nor would, of course, my admirers care to have me
abandoning my métier.”

And Gerald said also: “Even in the private relations which you have
chivalrously preserved for me, my dear fellow, one must not ask
everything. Wheresoever a man lives, there will be a thornbush near his
door: and I can manage well enough, I daresay, to put up with the
continuance of this illicit love-affair,—in which, after all, my
advanced age now protects me from being put to any frequent or
far-reaching inconvenience. Meanwhile, the legend of a life-long illicit
love-affair is a very splendid preservative for the fame of any writer.
It would have been even better, of course, if in conjugating the verb to
love, you had managed to make a few mistakes in gender; that is more
piquant; that is infallible: still, I repeat, one must not ask
everything. I have my satisfying legend of private immorality, created
without any least trouble on my part. Men will remember it. So all ends
very well indeed. I am content with what I have found upon Mispec Moor.
I am content with what I have found in Lichfield. And I shall not bother
any more about Antan, wherein, for one reason and another, I have found
nothing.”

“Do you not be speaking lightly of Antan! For I—do you not
understand?”—the young man spoke with an almost frightened
elation,—“it is I who am called to reign in Antan. You have brought me
the revealing word and the dreadful summons of Horvendile. Antan is my
appointed kingdom, into which I shall now be entering upon the silver
stallion famous in old prophecies.”

“Oh, oh!” said Gerald, “so that is how it is! All ends, again, with that
rather hackneyed scoring _Da capo_. And the eternal quest of Antan
continues, for all that I have no part in it....”

Yet the boy’s joyousness and proud faith appeared to old Gerald Musgrave
pitiable beyond thought. Gerald, now that he was fifty-eight, was of
course not really troubled by that pitiableness, because all actual
commiseration and sympathy for other persons had withered in him along
with the rest of youth’s over-upsetting emotions. Besides, Gerald saw
that, in logic, as a plain question of arithmetic, the boy did not
matter. A million or so other lads more or less like this enthusiastic
young fellow were at that instant preparing for the same downcasting and
failure; and by and by these lads also would be facing their own
unimportance with equanimity. For, as you—howsoever suddenly,—got
older, there was less bitterness, there was hardly any bitterness at
all, to be derived of the knowledge that in human living very much
amounted to nothing, because you saw even more clearly and more
constantly that nothing amounted to very much....

So Gerald said only: “You are young. At least, you are living in a young
body. So do you beware! For, so long as you go about the Marches of
Antan in any conveyance so perilous, the lying half-magic of the Two
Truths will beset that young body, and the Princess will await you at
every turn. She will encounter you under many names, for it is true
that, just as you said very long ago, women do vary in their given
names. She will encounter you in varying shapes. But in any case, she
waits for every young romantic everywhere, as a rather lovable and as an
interestingly formed and colored impediment.... I think it, therefore,
highly improbable that you will complete the journey to Antan. I, in any
case, am middle-aged. And I cry, not discontentedly, my personal
farewell to the half-magic of racing pulses and of distended nerves—”

For an instant Gerald was silent. In his old eyes awoke that gleam which
anybody familiar with Gerald would have recognized at once.

“You see,” he continued, with large affability, “while you have been
theorizing, my dear fellow,—oh, very charmingly, and with a
thoroughness which does you credit, great credit,—well, my
investigations meanwhile have taken a rather more practical turn. I am
not, of course, at liberty to speak of my love-affairs out yonder, with
any real explicitness. No, here, as always, _noblesse oblige_. Still, if
you only knew! If you but knew half as much as I do about that droll
escapade with the Lady Sigid of Audierne and her cousin the Abbess!
about what happened to me in the harem of Caliph Mizraim! about Beatrice
and Henriette and Madame Pamela and Vittoria and Elspeth! about the
three girls at the tanner’s! or if you knew the truth as to what her
Majesty and I were about that night we came so near being caught—!”

“I see,” the boy said, rather wistfully. “You have been a devil of a
fellow and a sad rip among the ladies.”

“Oh, dear me, not at all!” said Gerald. And the old fellow now wore the
expression which, sometimes, accompanies a blush. “It is merely that I
have talked a bit too freely. It is only that this rash tongue of mine
was running away with me. So I can but ask you to forget every word I
have uttered. For exalted names ought, really, not to be repeated thus
lightly. I shall therefore say nothing whatever about the eight other
queens with whom my name has been coupled,—with how good reason I, you
understand, must be the last person in the world to admit,—nor about
any of the empresses either. In fact, a great deal of the scandal about
my intimacy with one of them was exaggerated. No: I most certainly must
not voice any indiscretions about dear Caroline. So I merely point
out—without mentioning any names whatever,—that my experience has been
considerable: and I can assure you, my dear fellow, that in the end
these half-magics produce, after all, no very prodigious miracles.”

“But—” said the boy.

“No,” Gerald protested, “no, really, you must not tempt me with such
eloquence! It suffices that during the thirty years that you have sat
here theorizing,—and have, as it were, blossomed forth with all these
delightful books,—these half-magics have led me day after day from one
affair to its twin; they have led me into more or less jealously guarded
lowlands, which were not markedly dissimilar; they have led then from
one valley to another valley which looked and felt and, for that matter,
smelt very much the same; finally they led me to the fair breasts of
Maya. And I fell away into domesticity, I went no farther. But I was
wholly content there.... So I do not complain. I have lost through these
half-magics my appointed kingdom in Antan,—or so, at least, it appears
to me, in a world wherein perhaps nothing is indisputable except, of
course, historical and scientific truths. Yet the losing of my kingdom
has, none the less, been pleasant. I have had, under the harryings of
these half-magics—always, I mean, upon the whole,—an agreeable time.
To-night the half-magics whose appointed duty it is to keep all us
romantics from attaining to Antan have ceased bothering about me. After
to-night I am no longer formidable. I am, in a word, now that I approach
sixty, almost middle-aged. It follows that Antan does not concern me any
longer: and I shall think no more about Antan, wherein, for one reason
and another, I have found nothing.”

With that, gray Gerald Musgrave dipped his pen. He put the boy quite out
of mind. And the well-thought-of old scholar began to write, just where
his natural body had left off a bit earlier in the evening, setting down
decorously the historical and scientific truth as to the rules governing
pre-nuptial intercourse in the bedchambers of New Guinea and the Tonga
Islands.




                                  50.
                            Exodus of Glaum


THE boy waited, looking down at this old fellow who sat there making
small scratches upon paper, the most of which he presently canceled with
yet other scratches, all the while with the air of a person who is about
something intelligent and of actual importance. Then the boy shrugged.
For, as always, to an onlooker the motions of creative writing revealed
that flavor of the grotesque which is attendant upon every form of
procreation.

And besides, to him for whom the silver stallion waited without, and for
whom his appointed kingdom waited also, such time-wasting appeared
futile. He, who was young, and who retained as yet the untroubled faith
of every boy in his own abilities and in his own importance,—and who,
of course, might not foresee the fate which awaited him in the arms of
Evadne of the Dusk,—could not regard without impatience such
time-wasting. What made it even worse was that this dilapidated remnant
of a man was so plainly enjoying himself. For he chuckled as he wrote;
he had self-evidently found what he considered a rather beautiful idea
to play with, for now he had cocked his battered, so nearly bald, old
head to one side, and that which he had just written down was being
regarded by his dimmed and peering eyes with entire admiration: and it
was all somewhat pitiable to the young eyes of the observer.

For it did not seem possible that anybody should sit here, thus stuffily
immured, and with no exercise more profitable than writing, when yonder,
as all youth knew, the way lay open to the unimaginable splendors of
Antan. It was, for that matter, an unthrifty wantonness for Gerald
Musgrave’s young observer to be lingering here, in the cold company of
books and china animals, when yonder (as all youth knew) along the
pleasant way to Antan were waiting so many dear, fond, loving women
eager to cheer and to inspire and to trust and to give all to speed the
high-hearted adventurer in that glorious journeying toward his appointed
kingdom. Decidedly, the old fellow was lost: for now he was infatuated
by the contentment to be got out of writing, which remained always, in
its own way, as bedrugging as the contentment to be got out of
domesticity; and there was no help for this preposterous, doomed,
chuckling Gerald Musgrave,—who would always now be finding one or
another rather beautiful idea to play with, and who must remain, so long
as life remained, a poet whose one real delight was to shape and to play
with puppets....

Yet it mattered very little, to any person who was already for every
practical purpose a reigning monarch, that all which pertained to this
Gerald Musgrave was somewhat droll, the smiling red-haired boy decided,
as he passed toward Evadne of the Dusk, and out of sight of that
gray-fringed bald head bent over that incessant pen scratching.

[Illustration: THE END]




                           TRANSCRIBER NOTES


Misspelled words and printer errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in punctuation have been maintained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOMETHING ABOUT EVE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
